--- 
layout: page 
title: FAQs — Data Trusts Initiative 
---

## Pilot project funding call: frequently-asked questions

#### Who can apply for funding from the Data Trusts Initiative?

This funding programme is seeking pilot projects aiming to set up
real-world data trusts. Applications could come from individuals,
community groups, charities, social enterprises, public sector
organisations, start-ups or companies who wish to establish a data
trust.

The key feature we are looking for is ‘bottom-up’ engagement – we’re
looking for data trusts that will empower individuals or groups to
influence how data about them is used. Projects should be seeking to
respond to a real-world data stewardship need through a pilot project
that establishes a stewardship mechanism that fulfils the core features
of a data trust. The proposed project should:

- Enable collective action, empowering individuals or groups to
  influence how data about them is used.

- Provide independent stewardship of data rights by a data trustee on
  behalf of the beneficiaries of the Trust; and

- Create strong institutional safeguards to steward data use, based on
  trustee fiduciary duties together with oversight mechanisms.

We propose no restrictions on organisation type, nationality of
participants, or geographic scope of projects.

#### What types of data trust will be funded?

We are eager to hear your views about what type of data trust would best
serve stakeholder needs in different contexts. There are no restrictions
on sector, organisation scale, type or location; we will accept
applications from both the UK and internationally.

Applications will be assessed on the basis of their ability to deliver
the three core functions of data trusts, set out above.

#### Is my project a potential data trust?

Different types of data stewardship mechanism are more or less suited to
different contexts. Data trusts differ from other types of data
institutions in their focus on bottom-up empowerment and their use of
data trustees to provide independent stewardship of data within a
framework of strong safeguards (taking decisions about data use on
behalf of the trusts’ members).

To work through your ideas about which data sharing structure might be
most suitable for your data governance challenge, you might want to
check out this blogpost on [*Selecting a data sharing structure: a
value-based
choice*](https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/selectingdatastructures).

#### How much funding can I apply for?

In our Expression of Interest form, we ask you to give headline figures
for the amount of financial support you think you will require, for
further discussion later in the application process. We are open to bids
of up to £100-150,000, but would wish to discuss exact figures with
applicants in more detail.

#### When must the funds be used by?

Funds must be used or returned to the Data Trusts Initiative by 31
December 2022.

#### What can funding be used for? Are there any restrictions?

Funding can only be used for costs relevant to the establishment and
maintenance of the pilot project that are incurred during the award
period. These may include activities such as: staffing, training,
events, travel, software development. We’ll ask you for further
information about what types of cost you expect to be associated with
the project in the full application.

#### What other type of support will be available?

 In addition to awarding funds to facilitate the set-up of a pilot
project, the Data Trusts Initiative will support successful applicants
through the provision of expert advice, workshops and networking to help
navigate the issues you might encounter in establishing a trust.
Successful applicants will become part of a network and community of
specialists and practitioners creating opportunities for shared learning
and peer support.

#### How can I apply?

To submit an Expression of Interest, please visit the link below.
Deadline for applications is 30 September 2021.

[Expression of interest
form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdTP57wTpAXFkWKArUema21LbXkHQox2Xms52hQeCGQX1XMOg/viewform)

[PDF of EOI questions](/s/DTI_Pilot_Questions_2021.pdf)

#### How will my EoI be evaluated?

 We are seeking projects that will create data governance structures
that demonstrate the ability to deliver the three core features of a
data trust:

- Enable collective action, empowering individuals or groups to
  influence how data about them is used.

- Provide independent stewardship of data rights by a data Trustee on
  behalf of the beneficiaries of the Trust; and

- Create strong institutional safeguards to steward data use, based on
  Trustee fiduciary duties and the ability of courts to intervene,
  amongst other interventions.

EoIs will be reviewed to assess alignment of the proposed project with
these outcomes, (and capability to deliver them), alongside the
motivations and focus of the project.

#### What happens after I submit an EoI?

The EoI is the first stage of a two-part process. The Data Trusts
Initiative team will review EoIs and invite a shortlist of projects to
submit a full application form. At EoI stage we’ll be reviewing projects
for their alignment with the functions of a data trust, motivations for
establishing a data trust, and the likelihood of passing due diligence
checks by Cambridge University

#### My question is not covered above

Following the information session on the Data Trusts Initiative’s new
pilot project funding scheme, we’ve now published an update to our FAQs,
which you can access here: <https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/our-pilot-programme-faqs>


Please email any questions to <data-trusts@cst.cam.ac.uk>

#### Further Reading & Resources

To find out more about data trusts and their role in data stewardship,
you might want to make use of the resources below:

[Bottom-up data Trusts: Disturbing the ‘one size fits all’ approach to
data governance](https://www.repository.cam.ac.uk/handle/1810/301307)
(Research Paper by Neil Lawrence and Sylvie Delacroix)

[Data Trusts: from theory to
practice](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5e3b09f0b754a35dcb4111ce/t/5fdb21f9537b3a6ff2315429/1608196603713/Working+Paper+1+-+data+trusts+-+from+theory+to+practice.pdf)
(Working Paper from the Data Trusts Initiative)

[International perspectives on the development of data
institutions](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5e3b09f0b754a35dcb4111ce/t/603ce3325e1da817afe6b193/1614603061204/WP+2+-+DTI+-+global+perspectives.pdf)
(Working Paper from the Data Trusts Initiative)

[A research agenda for data
trusts](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5e3b09f0b754a35dcb4111ce/t/60eeb409aa539923b58c4a4f/1626256394651/WP+3+-+DTI+-+research+agenda+-+June21.pdf)
(Working Paper from the Data Trusts Initiative)

[Selecting a data sharing structure: a value-based
choice](https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/selectingdatastructures) (blogpost)

[Legal mechanisms for data stewardship (blogpost)](https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/legal-mechanisms-for-data-stewardship-the-role-of-data-trusts)

