---
layout: post
title: "Funding Call: Moving Data Trusts from Theory to Practice"
author:
- given: Jessica
  family: Montgomery
  institute: University of Cambridge
  person_page: jessica-montgomery
featured_image: /assets/images/library-corridor.jpg
excerpt: |
  The Data Trusts Initiative is offering research grants for projects that can help bridge the gap between discussions about the potential of data trusts and their practical application. 
date: 2020-12-17
redirect_from:
  - /blogs/funding-call-moving-data-trusts-from-theory-to-practice
  - /blogs/funding-call-moving-data-trusts-from-theory-to-practice/
---

[The Data Trusts
Initiative](https://www.cst.cam.ac.uk/research/data-trusts) is an
interdisciplinary programme that pursues research at the interface of
technology, policy and the law to better understand the role data trusts
can play in addressing the challenges of data governance in the 21st
century. As part of its work, the Initiative -- which is supported by a
donation from the Patrick J McGovern Foundation -- is offering research
grants for projects that can help bridge the gap between discussions
about the potential of data trusts and their practical application. 

Researchers are invited to apply for funding to pursue research in areas
where further insights are needed to help develop data trusts. Examples
of relevant areas include:

-   Core concepts in data trust design: What core capabilities must sit
    at the heart of any data trust? What are the incentives for
    different individuals, groups or organisations to engage with data
    trusts? 

-   Participation, inclusion and digital equity: Which interventions can
    help make data trusts accessible to all in society? What mechanisms
    for participation can ensure that all those in a trust can
    meaningfully contribute to decision-making?

-   Institutional safeguards: Beyond those safeguards provided by trust
    law, what mechanisms for accountability would help ensure that a
    data trust effectively represents those it serves?

-   Finance and economics: What business models could data trusts use to
    achieve financial sustainability? What interventions would be needed
    to support a plurality of data trusts?

-   Lessons learned: What lessons from previous research or experience
    could be applied to advance the development of data trusts? For
    example, what existing case law or experiences of participatory
    governance are relevant?

-   Implementation issues: In what areas might there be a demand for
    data trust, and what use cases could help clarify how data trusts
    would work in practice? What support will data trustees need to
    perform their role? How could legal frameworks in civil law
    jurisdictions be adapted to fulfil the role of data trusts?

Proposals that address issues not covered above, but that are relevant
to the design and establishment of data trusts, are also welcome. 

Awards of up to £15,000 will be available. To apply for funding,
please  complete and submit the application form
here <https://forms.gle/4Kuz93xCLMLVrHYH8> by 10:00 am GMT on 29 January
2021. For further information, please review the FAQs below or
contact <data-trusts@cst.cam.ac.uk>.

For further information about the context and areas of interest for the
Data Trusts Initiative, please consider the Initiative's [first Working
Paper](/assets/pdfs/working-paper-1-data-trusts-from-theory-to-practice.pdf).

[**FAQs**]{style="text-decoration:underline"}

**Who is eligible to apply?**

Funding is available for research projects across all disciplines.
Applications from those working both inside and outside the University
of Cambridge are welcome, including those working outside the UK.
Project proposals must have a clear link to the development and
practical application of data trusts, and we particularly encourage
multidisciplinary proposals. 

This funding is suitable for projects that can start immediately or in a
very short timescale, with teams that can begin work and achieve
successful outcomes within a year. 

**How can I apply?**

To apply, please submit an application form by 10:00 am GMT on 29
January 2021. The form is available at this
link: <https://forms.gle/4Kuz93xCLMLVrHYH8>

**Over what timescale should research be carried out?**

Projects are expected to start as soon as possible and report within a
year of commencing. Projects should be in a position to present their
findings -- or interim findings -- by September 2021 at a project
workshop.

**How will my research proposal be evaluated?**

Research proposals will be reviewed by a panel and evaluated on the
basis of the following criteria:

-   Contribution of the research to addressing key issues in developing
    and implementing data trusts;

-   Strength of proposal in helping build a community of researchers and
    practitioners working on data trusts;

-   Deliverability within the proposed timescale.

We particularly encourage bids that bring together different
perspectives or disciplines. For a sense of the issues within scope of
the funding call, please visit ['Data Trusts: from theory to
practice'](/assets/pdfs/working-paper-1-data-trusts-from-theory-to-practice.pdf 
).

**What outputs are expected from my research? **

Successful applicants will be required to produce a working paper, with
executive summary, to be hosted on the Data Trusts Initiative website,
which will be presented at a project workshop and reviewed by the
project advisory board. 

We expect that funding recipients will be able to publish their final
research paper as they see fit, though we ask that they coordinate with
the Initiative's team to help maximise its reach.  

**What size of award is available?**

Funding awards of up to £15,000 are available, depending on the quality
and relevance of the research proposal.
