---
layout: post
title: "Data trusts and the EU data strategy"
author:
- given: Sylvie
  family: Delacroix
  institute: University of Birmingham
  person_page: sylvie-delacroix
- given: Jessica
  family: Montgomery
  institute: University of Cambridge
  person_page: jessica-montgomery
featured_image: /assets/images/night-street.jpg
excerpt: |
  The EUâ€™s draft data strategy set out its aim to promote a European data economy, while protecting individual rights and embedding ethical considerations in data governance. Data trusts offer a tool for bridging the gap between aspirations to share data and concerns about individual rights. This blog considers the role of data trusts in the European policy landscape and the action needed to create a policy environment to support their development.
date: 2020-06-07
---

**This blog considers the role of data trusts in the European policy
landscape and the action needed to create a policy environment to
support their development.**

The continued success of the digital economy relies on data being
available to those developing new technologies, products, and services,
and public confidence in data use. However, with new uses of data
potentially creating novel vulnerabilities or [exposing individuals to
harm](https://academic.oup.com/idpl/article/9/4/236/5579842), there is
often a tension between the desire to make data -- in particular,
personal data -- more accessible and the desire to protect individual
rights. This tension sits at the heart of many of today's debates about
data governance.

A package of policy announcements made by the EU earlier this year
indicate how it intends to manage this tension, with a white paper on AI
aiming to promote a framework for technology development based on
"[excellence and
trust](https://ec.europa.eu/info/files/white-paper-artificial-intelligence-european-approach-excellence-and-trust_en)"
and a [data
strategy](https://ec.europa.eu/info/files/communication-european-strategy-data_en)
to support data availability and use. At the core of both is the
ambition to embed individual and social values in the data economy.
Reflecting this ambition ,when [introducing new
strategies](https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_273)
on data and AI, President von der Leyen called for an EU digital
environment that "reflects the best of Europe -- open, fair, diverse,
democratic, and confident."

To achieve this aim, the EU's draft data strategy calls for action to
increase data availability, redress imbalances in market power, and
implement governance systems that empower individuals to exercise their
data rights. Its proposed approach to these challenges is the
development of common data spaces -- to increase the flow of data in key
areas -- alongside the introduction of measures to support individuals
to exert their rights over data they generate.

A variety of EU frameworks already regulates different forms of data
use, while creating a constellation of data rights and responsibilities.
These stem from regulations on the [use of personal
data](https://gdpr-info.eu/), the [flow of non-personal
data](https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/free-flow-non-personal-data),
[cybersecurity](https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/eu-cybersecurity-act)
policies, and legislation to promote [open
data](https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/european-legislation-reuse-public-sector-information).
However, these top-down approaches cannot on their own bridge the gap
between the aspiration to share data and the need to protect individuals
and groups from the vulnerabilities that stem from data sharing.

Data trusts offer a tool to help fill this gap, supporting the creation
of European data spaces, particularly in areas where personal data is at
stake.

A data trust is an institution that uses trust law as a framework for
data governance. It provides a mechanism for groups of individuals to
pool the data rights created by law (such as the GDPR) into an
organisation - a trust. Within the framework of a trust, trustees are
tasked with leveraging these data rights to obtain better terms and
conditions for data use from service providers, or with negotiating and
monitoring data sharing agreements. Bound by a fiduciary obligation of
undivided loyalty, the data trustees would exercise the data rights
conferred by the GDPR (or other regulation) on behalf of the trust's
beneficiaries.

Data trusts are designed to complement existing legal and regulatory
frameworks that define the rights an individual has over how data about
them is used. Having access to the data pooled by its members would give
the trust a stronger voice in negotiations with organisations seeking to
use data than any individual could have. The data trustees would be
placed in a position where they can negotiate data use in conformity
with the trust's terms, thus introducing a much-needed, independent and
intermediary layer between data subjects and data collectors.

Adding to 'one size fits all' regulatory approaches that set the
boundaries of data use, each trust would define its own approach to data
management (within legal confines), taking into account the aspirations
of its members. The fiduciary duties that direct the work of data
trustees offer strong safeguards that mean a trust would be an
independent steward of data. In this way, trusts could offer a way of
aligning an individual's (or group's) values with the way their data is
used, connecting the aspiration to share data for collective benefit
with the desire to protect individual rights.

Across the world, there is growing interest in the development of data
trusts as a means of trustworthy data governance. Germany's Data Ethics
Commission has recommended further funding to research and develop data
trust schemes, the Canadian Government has been consulting on similar
proposals via its Digital Charter, and the UK Government's AI review
called for the development of data trusts to facilitate the development
and deployment of AI.

Further policy development is needed to understand whether additional
legislative measures are necessary to enable citizens to invest their
data or data rights in a data trust, or move between trusts; further
research is necessary to understand what jurisdictional issues might
arise in the development of data trusts internationally, and what forms
of international cooperation might be needed to address these; and new
policies or institutions may be required to support the
professionalisation of data trustees.

Progressing the concepts and methods behind the idea of data trusts in
the EU will require action from policymakers, industry and civil
society:

-   to better understand the limits of existing regulatory provisions -
    particularly when it comes to mandatability - concerning data
    portability, access, and erasure, clarifying, for example: is
    further EU-level intervention required to make the latter rights
    mandatable to a data trustee, or should such interventions be made
    by national regulators?

-   to develop further the processes by which individuals can move their
    data (between trusts or otherwise);

-   to support a wide range of individuals and communities to engage
    with data trusts to ensure that their benefits and protections are
    accessible by all, especially currently disenfranchised communities.

The European Data Strategy is an opportunity to review both the
legislative and socio-economic environment that would help foster the
development of data trusts in the EU, and to identify how the EU can
maintain a leading role in future developments in this area of data
governance.

