---
layout: post
title: "International Approaches to Data Trusts: Recent Policy Developments from India, Canada and the EU"
author:
- given: Sylvie
  family: Delacroix
  institute: University of Birmingham
  person_page: sylvie-delacroix
- given: Jessica
  family: Montgomery
  institute: University of Cambridge
  person_page: jessica-montgomery
featured_image: /assets/images/night-parliament.jpg
excerpt: |
  Governments across the world are embedding the idea of data trusts in policy developments. This post reviews recent policy proposals from India, Canada and the EU.
date: 2020-10-01
---

Our [previous
blog](https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/data-trusts-and-the-eu-data-strategy)
explored the role that data trusts could play in delivering the EU's
data strategy. Since then, governments around the world have continued
to publish policy proposals that give a central place to 'data trusts'.
While the legal underpinnings of such 'data trusts' often need further
unpacking, a common thread runs through all of these proposals: an
endeavour to balance the desire to share data -- to support economic
activity and societal wellbeing -- and concerns about potential harms
arising from data use. 

This post summarises some of these developments, and the questions they
pose about how to create data trusts that empower individuals and groups
while unlocking the societal benefits inherent in responsible data
sharing.

#### India's Committee of Experts on Non-Personal Data: Promoting Data Trusts

In late 2019, India's Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
established a committee tasked with designing a framework for the
regulation of non-personal data. In July, this Committee of Experts on
Non-Personal Data [published its
recommendations](https://ourgovdotin.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/kris-gopalakrishnan-committee-report-on-non-personal-data-governance-framework.pdf),
putting data trusts front-and-centre in its proposals. 

[This
report](https://ourgovdotin.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/kris-gopalakrishnan-committee-report-on-non-personal-data-governance-framework.pdf) argues that
"given the increasing importance and value generation capacity of the
data economy, governments around the world realise the need to enable
and regulate all aspects of data, both Personal and Non-Personal Data".
It defines three types of non-personal data, which can relate to data
collected by governments when carrying out publicly-funded work,
anonymised data about communities, and data related to assets or
processes that are privately-owned or result from private effort. 

In seeking to govern this data, [the
report](https://ourgovdotin.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/kris-gopalakrishnan-committee-report-on-non-personal-data-governance-framework.pdf)
argues for the creation of data trusts. It proposes a policy framework
in which a data principal -- the individual, community or organisation
to which the personal data relates -- would exercise its data rights
"through an appropriate community data trustee". That data trustee
should be "the closest and most appropriate representative body for the
community concerned", and could be a government entity, citizens' group,
or a university, for example. Such trusts would help rebalance power in
the data economy between established data-driven platforms with ready
access to large amounts of data and new entrants or start-ups.

[Responding to these
proposals](https://blog.mozilla.org/netpolicy/files/2020/09/Mozilla-Non-Personal-Data-Consultatiaon-Submission-India.pdf), Mozilla
noted the potential of such data intermediaries in enabling trustworthy
data use, but also called for further work to identify appropriate
technical systems to manage data held in trust, to consider
jurisdictional issues associated with the legal instruments underpinning
the trust, and to mechanisms of accountability. 

The findings of this report
are [expected](https://www.globalgovernmentforum.com/india-considers-non-personal-data-sharing-regulation/) to
be reflected in the Personal Data Protection Bill, currently before
India's Parliament.

#### Developments in the EU's data strategy: 'novel data intermediaries' (including data trusts)

In her September 2020 [State
of the Union](https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/strategic-planning/state-union-addresses/state-union-2020_en)
speech, President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen
reiterated the Commission's commitment to the introduction of policy
interventions that support data use and give citizens more control over
their personal data. This speech builds on policy announcements
published earlier this year, with a white paper on AI aiming to promote
a framework for technology development based on "[excellence and
trust](https://ec.europa.eu/info/files/white-paper-artificial-intelligence-european-approach-excellence-and-trust_en)"
and a [data
strategy](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1593073685620&uri=CELEX%3A52020DC0066) to
support data availability and use.

In further pursuit of this ambition, [a recent
consultation](https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/12491-Legislative-framework-for-the-governance-of-common-European-data-spaces)
on a legislative framework for the governance of common European data
spacesset out actions to reduce barriers to data sharing, by
fostering "structural enablers", including both new bodies and new
processes, that could help effectively manage the data rights already
set out under EU law. Noting that "voluntary data-sharing remains costly
and complicated", for both technical and procedural reasons, these
proposals stated support for the "novel data intermediaries", including
data trusts, that are emerging as a tool to enable data sharing by
individuals and organisations. 

Further developments in the EU's data strategy are expected later this
year. 

#### The Government of Ontario's data trusts consultation

Earlier this month, the Government of Ontario launched a public
[consultation](https://news.ontario.ca/en/release/57985/ontario-launches-consultations-to-strengthen-privacy-protections-of-personal-data)
on proposals to revamp its data privacy legislation. This
consultation proposes to "create a legislative framework to enable the
establishment of data trusts for privacy protective data sharing". 

Data trusts have been the subject of policy debate in Ontario since
2018's proposal by Sidewalk Labs to create a civic data trust, tasked
with governing data collected as part of a controversial waterfront
development. Announcing the consultation, Ontario's Minister of
Government and Consumer Services cited privacy concerns arising from the
increased reliance of many citizens on digital services during the
COVID-19 pandemic as a key driver for seeking new policy frameworks that
enhance transparency and accountability in data use. 

These new
proposals [define](https://news.ontario.ca/en/release/57985/ontario-launches-consultations-to-strengthen-privacy-protections-of-personal-data) data
trusts as "a legal mechanism that enables an organization's data to be
governed by a trusted third party, to ensure the transparent and
accountable use of that data". They sit alongside wider proposed
changes, including enhanced data portability, increased enforcement
powers for the Information and Privacy Commissioner, and a right for
individuals to request that information about them be deleted.

The written consultation will be open until October.

#### Further questions raised by these proposals

As this policy area continues to evolve, these recent announcements
highlight a range of issues or questions where further attention is
needed, if governments are to realise the potential of data trusts. For
example:

*What enabling rights need to be in place?*

In our [last
post](https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/data-trusts-and-the-eu-data-strategy),
we argued that, if the EU's data strategy is to effectively support the
development of data trusts, then further work is needed to better
understand both the limits and flexibility inherent in regulatory
provisions concerning data portability, access, and erasure. Central to
the ability of data trusts to secure positive outcomes is the role of
the data trustee in exercising data rights -- such as relating to
portability -- on behalf of their beneficiaries, and there is an
emerging debate about whether further regulatory intervention is needed
to make such rights mandatable to a trustee. That Ontario's proposed
policy framework links the development of data trusts to rights
regarding portability and erasure further underlines the need for
regulatory clarity in these areas, if trusts are to be implemented.

*Who should act as a trustee and how can trustees be held to account? *

In proposing that government could act as a data trustee, India's
proposals [have raised
questions](https://www.globalgovernmentforum.com/india-considers-non-personal-data-sharing-regulation/) about
who could -- or should -- be able to take on a trustee role, and what
forms of accountability are needed to ensure trustees act in accordance
with the interests of a trust's beneficiaries. The potential absence of
a fiduciary responsibility under the Committee's proposals have [also
prompted
concerns](https://www.medianama.com/2020/08/223-nama-data-trusts/) about
the level of safeguards that these trusts would provide, and whether
they should be designed as trusts, with strong fiduciary elements, or
whether other legal models -- such as data cooperatives or data commons
-- might be more suitable for their functions. These concerns
echo [previous
debates](https://www.cigionline.org/articles/reclaiming-data-trusts) arising
from Sidewalk Labs' proposal to establish a 'data trust' in Toronto and
wider concerns about the extent to which the term 'data trust' might be
deployed as a [marketing
tool](https://theodi.org/article/data-trusts-in-2020/) to garner support
for a seemingly socially-conscious governance system, without creating
underlying mechanisms to achieve such social benefits.

*What role can trust law play in addressing concerns about
disenfranchisement and accountability? *

We've [previously
argued](https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/selectingdatastructures) on this
blog that trust law can be a tool for addressing concerns about
enfranchisement. Trust law can providea mechanism for individuals and
groups to reverse the direction of consent, tasking their data trustees
with the negotiation of terms and conditions from service providers on a
collective basis. 

Trust law already provides accountability mechanisms (were a data
trustee to be found in breach of their fiduciary responsibilities, the
Court overseeing the trust can intervene and remove the trustee), but
further work may be required to clarify and develop these mechanisms, as
different actors seek to take on trustee roles. Further research about
the manner in which trust law (or its key functional elements) may be
applied across non- common-law jurisdictions will also be needed.

