---
layout: post
title: "From Theory to Practice: How do we Create Real-World Data Trusts?"
author:
- given: Jessica
  family: Montgomery
  institute: University of Cambridge
  person_page: jessica-montgomery  
featured_image: /assets/images/classified-ads.jpg
excerpt: |
  By empowering individuals to assert their data rights, data trusts
  offer a way for individuals and groups to influence how and why
  organisations are able to use data about them. However, despite much
  recent excitement surrounding the role data trusts could play in
  creating trustworthy data governance institutions, gaps in
  understanding about the form and function of these trusts remain.
  spread of COVID-19 (and the ethical issues that follow), an article
  and a letter to the Financial Times make the case for further
  efforts to develop data stewardship mechanisms, such as data trusts.
date: 2020-12-17
redirect_from:
  - /blogs/moving-from-theory-to-practice-how-do-we-create-real-world-data-trusts
  - /blogs/moving-from-theory-to-practice-how-do-we-create-real-world-data-trusts/
---

As we've [written on this blog
before](https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/international-policy-developments),
policymakers, data ethics practitioners, researchers and businesses have
spent the past few years discussing how data trusts could help fill the
gaps in our current data governance landscape. The Data Trusts
Initiative is seeking to shift the dial in these discussions from theory
to practice, identifying the actions needed to create viable data trusts
and supporting pilot data trusts projects. Our first Working Paper,
[published
today](/assets/pdfs/Working-Paper-1-data-trusts-from-theory-to-practice.pdf),
seeks to support this shift by setting out some of the areas where we
need to better understand the conceptual underpinnings of data trusts
and how they might work.

Data trusts are mechanisms for individuals to pool the data rights
created by current legislation into an organisation -- a trust -- in
which trustees make decisions about data use on their behalf.
Complementing the regulatory regimes that already exist in many
countries, these new data institutions would seek to manage the
vulnerabilities that arise from shifting patterns of data use. Through a
combination of independent stewardship, institutional safeguards, and
collective action, data trusts could help empower individuals and groups
to influence the terms by which data about them may be used. 

Achieving this goal will require action to clarify the nature of the
rights and responsibilities of those involved in a trust, identify the
tools that can manage those rights and responsibilities, and set in
place the mechanisms that can ensure data trusts achieve their intended
purpose. These areas for action form the basis of a varied
interdisciplinary research agenda -- summarised in our [Working Paper
(Data Trusts: from theory to
practice)](/assets/pdfs/Working-Paper-1-data-trusts-from-theory-to-practice.pdf)
-- and include:

-   Conceptual clarity: How do data trusts fit in the wider data
    governance landscape, and which core capabilities must sit at the
    heart of any real-world data trust?

-   Accountability: What institutional safeguards would help ensure a
    data trust represents and operates for the benefit of those it
    purports to serve?

-   Participation, inclusion and digital equity: Which interventions can
    help make data trusts accessible to all in society, and ensure that
    all those in a trust can meaningfully contribute to decision-making?

-   Finance and sustainability: Which business models can help ensure
    the continued sustainability of a data trust?

-   Implementation issues: Which use cases can help clarify how data
    trusts would work in practice?

Tackling these research challenges will take a community -- of lawyers,
technologies, policy experts, public engagement specialists, social
entrepreneurs, and more -- to synthesise insights from across research
disciplines and develop ideas about the structures or practices that
need to be in place to create real-world data trusts. As a starting
point in helping create this community, we're inviting applications for
funding to carry out research that can help us understand how to move
data trusts from theory to practice. We're looking for projects that
bring together interdisciplinary teams working on issues that are
central to the development and implementation of data trusts.

This funding call is open until 29 January, and you can find further
details about how to apply in our funding FAQs post. In the meantime, if
you'd like to join this community and hear more about the work of the
Data Trusts Initiative, please [sign up to our mailing list](/contact).
