---
layout: post
title: "Research and Policy (Spring 2019 Update)"
author:
- given: Jessica
  family: Montgomery
  institute: University of Cambridge
featured_image: /assets/images/glasses-on-book.jpg
excerpt: |
  This paper by Sylvie Delacroix and Neil Lawrence sets the scene for
  discussions about the use of Trust law as a data governance tool,
  arguing for the creation of ‘bottom-up” data trusts as a new form of
  data governance.

  The issues this paper raises were explored further in 2020’s Global
  Forum on AI for Humanity, which you can view on Inria’s YouTube
  channel, and at a workshop by The Alan Turing Institute and Jesus
  College Intellectual Forum.
date: 2020-06-02
---

[This paper](https://doi.org/10.1093/idpl/ipz014) by Sylvie Delacroix
and Neil Lawrence sets the scene for discussions about the use of Trust
law as a data governance tool, arguing for the creation of 'bottom-up"
data trusts as a new form of data governance.

The issues this paper raises were explored further in 2020's Global
Forum on AI for Humanity, which you can view on [Inria's YouTube
channel](https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=emb_title&v=pWTQ1ZpyanM),
and at a [workshop by The Alan Turing Institute and Jesus College
Intellectual Forum](/s/23-September-data-trusts-workshop-note.pdf). A
summary of some of the key issues is available in [this slide pack
(PDF)](/s/S-Delacroix-Data-Trusts-March-2020-v1.pdf). Drawing from these
ideas, Element AI and Nesta held [a
workshop](https://hello.elementai.com/rs/024-OAQ-547/images/Data_Trusts_EN_201914.pdf)
exploring the role of trusts as a data governance tool, and some of the
key policy challenges.

In 2019, Element AI and the Mozilla Foundation
[announced](https://www.elementai.com/press-room/element-ai-and-mozilla-foundation-partner-to-build-data-trusts-and-advocate-for-the-ethical-data-governance-of-ai)
they'd be partnering on work to develop data trusts and identify steps
to advance the application of these ideas. This [Medium post by Anouk
Ruhaak](https://medium.com/@anoukruhaak/data-trusts-why-what-and-how-a8b53b53d34),
a Mozilla Fellow, suggests some areas where data trusts could play a
role. Building on these ideas, a March 2020 [post by Andrew
Hoppin](https://medium.com/@ahoppin/trust-not-data-as-the-new-oil-designing-for-data-trusts-2ff128a85528)
called for further investment in data trusts as a means of embedding
trust in the design of data sharing structures.

The Open Data Institute (ODI) has carried out a series of pilot projects
and feasibility studies into the development of data trusts as
mechanisms for sharing data between organisations. [Their website
reports](https://theodi.org/article/odi-data-trusts-report/) the results
of these pilot studies, and the next steps to create such trusts. I[n a
recent
blogpost](https://theodi.org/article/what-do-we-mean-by-data-institutions/),
the ODI also considers the role data trusts can play alongside other
forms of data institution. And [this working
paper](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3458192) by
the National University of Singapore explores the use of trust law as a
basis for managing data, and the data protection issues at play.

A
[paper](https://cdn.southampton.ac.uk/assets/imported/transforms/content-block/UsefulDownloads_Download/69C60B6AAC8C4404BB179EAFB71942C0/White%20Paper%202.pdf) by
the University of Southampton Web Science Institute explore the use of
Jersey's Foundation Law system to provide independent stewardship of
data. This builds on [previous
work](https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/428276/1/WSI_White_Paper_1.pdf) by the
Institute exploring the link between data trusts and existing forms of
governance.

Contributing to continuing debates about the development of civic data
trusts in the context of smart cities, [this
primer](https://marsdd.gitbook.io/datatrust/) explores how trusts can
play a role in enhancing democratic governance at city level.

#### Policy documents 

In the UK, 2017's [Hall-Pesenti
review](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/growing-the-artificial-intelligence-industry-in-the-uk) -
a foundation of the Government AI strategy - recommended the development
of data trusts as a means of enabling data access.

As part of a series of consultations on updates to personal information
protection legislation, the [Canadian
Government](https://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/062.nsf/eng/h_00107.html) set
out proposals to develop data trusts as an enabler of digital
innovation.

Germany's [Data Ethics
Commission](https://www.bmjv.de/DE/Themen/FokusThemen/Datenethikkommission/Datenethikkommission_EN_node.html)
recommended in 2019 that data trusts be prioritised for further research
and development.

A recent communication from the European Commission - '[A European data
strategy](https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/communication-european-strategy-data-19feb2020_en.pdf)' -
suggests a range of measures, including data trusts, that could empower
individuals to exercise their data rights. This document is currently
open for consulation.
