---
layout: post
title: Legal mechanisms for data stewardship - the role of data trusts
author: 
- given: Jessica
  family: Montgomery
  institute: University of Cambridge
  person_page: jessica-montgomery
featured_image: /assets/images/legal-mechanisms.jpg 
excerpt: A new report from the Ada Lovelace Institute, in partnership with the Data Trusts Initiative, AI Council, ODI and City of London Law Society, explores the different legal mechanisms that can contribute to data stewardship.
date: 2021-03-04
redirect_from:
  - /blogs/legal-mechanisms-for-data-stewardship-the-role-of-data-trusts
  - /blogs/legal-mechanisms-for-data-stewardship-the-role-of-data-trusts/
---

The challenge of 21st century data governance is to create systems of
data stewardship that enable access to data while managing the rights
associated with different data types in ways that command public
confidence. [Different legal mechanisms can play different roles in data
stewardship](https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/selectingdatastructures): data
trusts, cooperatives, corporations and contracts can all contribute in
different ways to the safe and effective use of data. 

To explore the opportunities and benefits associated with these
different models, over the last year the Data Trusts Initiative has been
working with the AI Council, Open Data Institute, City of London Law
Society and Ada Lovelace Institute on a review of legal mechanisms for
data stewardship. The report – [published
today](https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/report/legal-mechanisms-data-stewardship/) –
summarises how different legal frameworks can help achieve different
data sharing objectives, and what action is needed to advance these
forms of data stewardship. It considers three legal mechanisms that can
underpin data sharing activities:

- Corporate or contractual mechanisms, which are perhaps the most common
  form of data access arrangement in use today. These create terms and
  conditions for data use that are mutually agreed by parties in a
  data-sharing relationship – they facilitate sharing of specified data
  for an agreed purpose. 

- Data cooperatives can also be established using contractual or
  corporate structures, but this form of data stewardship focuses on
  allowing members to pool their resources to take a stake in management
  of the cooperative organisation. 

- Data trusts are an emerging alternative approach to data governance. A
  data trust is a proposed mechanism for individuals to take the data
  rights that are set out in law (or the beneficial interest in those
  rights) and pool these into an organisation in which trustees would
  exercise the data rights conferred by the law on behalf of the trust’s
  beneficiaries. ** **

This blog post takes excerpts from the report to summarise how data
trusts contribute to this landscape of data stewardship –

## Why create data trusts?

**Trust law offers strong institutional safeguards: **Core to the
rationale for using trust law as a vehicle for data governance is the
fiduciary duty it creates. Trustees are required to act with undivided
loyalty and dedication to the interests and aspirations of the
beneficiaries. The strong safeguards this provides can create a
foundation for data governance that gives data subjects confidence that
their data rights are being managed with care. Adding to these fiduciary
duties, the law of equity provides a framework for accountability. If
not adhering to the constitutional terms of a trust, trustees can be
held to account for their actions by the trust’s beneficiaries or the
overseeing Court acting on their behalf. The Court’s equitable
jurisdiction to supervise and intervene if necessary is not easily
replicable within a contractual or corporate framework.

**Data trusts provide a vehicle for collective action: **By leveraging
the negotiating power inherent in pooled data rights, the data trustee
would become a more powerful voice in contract negotiations, and be
better placed to achieve favourable terms of data use than any single
individual. In so doing, the role of the data trustee would be to
empower the beneficiaries, widening their choices about data use beyond
the ‘accept or walk away’ dichotomy presented by current governance
structures. It is possible to imagine situations in which individuals
might group together on the basis of shared values or attitudes to risk,
and seek to use this shared understanding to promote data use. In coming
together to define the terms of a trust, individuals would be able to
express their agency and influence data use by defining their vision.
Current legal frameworks offer few opportunities to enable group action
in this way. 

**Data trusts have the flexibility to respond to emerging areas of need,
where rights and responsibilities might not yet be well-defined: **Trust
law has ancient roots. The fiduciary responsibilities at its core can be
traded to practices established in Roman law, and the idea of a ‘trust’
has its origins in medieval England. Over this long history, the Courts
of Chancery have played an important role in settling claims over rights
and creating remedies where these rights have been infringed. Centred
around the concept of equity – that disputes should be settled in ways
that are fair and just – these Courts have often found or clarified
rights that might not be directly visible in Common Law, but which can
be adjudicated on according to principles of fairness. It is in part
this ability to flex and adapt over time that has ensured the longevity
of trusts and trust law as a governance tool. In today’s environment of
rapid technological change and shifting patterns of data use, the
flexibility offered by trusts offers the possibility of creating a
governance mechanism that is able to adapt to emerging needs. In
conditions of change or uncertainty around data use, this flexibility
offers the ability to act now to promote some types of data use, while
creating space to change practices in the future. 

## Building on the report

Data trusts, data cooperatives and corporate and contractual mechanisms
can all be powerful mechanisms in the data-governance toolbox. Which
mechanism to choose for any circumstances will depend on a number of
factors, in particular the intended outcome and the nature of the
relationship between the different parties involved. In this context,
data trusts can be an important tool for data stewardship where the aim
is to redistribute power in decisions about data use, supporting
individuals to better assert their data rights.

In thinking about how to develop ideas around data trusts, the report
notes that: *Understanding what data rights can be placed in trust, when
those rights arise and how a trust can manage those rights will be
crucial in creating a data trust. Further work will be required to
analyse the sorts of powers that a trustee tasked with stewarding those
rights might be able to wield, and the advantages that might accrue to
the trust’s beneficiaries as a result.* These areas of investigation are
core to the work of the Data Trusts Initiative. For further information
about the steps necessary to move data trusts from theory to
practice, [take a look at our first Working
Paper](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5e3b09f0b754a35dcb4111ce/t/5fdb21f9537b3a6ff2315429/1608196603713/Working+Paper+1+-+data+trusts+-+from+theory+to+practice.pdf) on
this topic.

To read the full report on Legal Mechanisms for Data Stewardship, [visit
the Ada Lovelace Institute’s
website](https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/report/legal-mechanisms-data-stewardship/).

