---
layout: post
title: How can civil law jurisdictions support data trusts? The Quebec example
author: 
- family: Hulin
  given: Anne-Sophie
  institute: Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute (ANITI- France) and University of Ottawa
  person_page: anne-sophie-hulin
featured_image: /assets/images/unsplash-image-zeH-ljawHtg.jpg
excerpt: In most civil law jurisdictions, the use of trust law for data stewardship is not part of the legal landscape - trusts are generally emblematic of common rather than civil law traditions. The “civilization” of trust law is complex, affecting the contours and content of fundamental notions of civil law (ownership, legal person, patrimony).
date: 2021-07-14
---

*Dr Anne-Sophie Hulin is Postdoctoral fellow at Artificial and
Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute (ANITI- France), and Researcher
at the Chair On Accountable IA in a Global world, University of Ottawa
(Canada)*

## Data trusts and civil law jurisdictions

In most civil law jurisdictions, the use of trust law for data
stewardship is not part of the legal landscape - trusts are generally
emblematic of common rather than civil law traditions. The
“civilization” of trust law is complex, affecting the contours and
content of fundamental notions of civil law (ownership, legal person,
patrimony). Some civil law jurisdictions have trust-like institutions,
but their legal basis is different from trust law. For example, France
is familiar with fiduciary duties since the introduction of
the*fiducie*in 2007, but its scope is very limited and cannot be
applied to data governance as the law stands. France also has another
type of legal tool through which it is possible to design
legally-regulated data sharing frameworks (i.e.*groupement intérêt
public or GIP*). This is the basis for its national[Health Data
Hub](https://www.health-data-hub.fr/)and other and other data
pooling projects for sharing. However, even if the*GIP*operates as an
independent data sharing intermediary, it is not a trust-like
institution because its legal regime is very different from the common
law of trusts and cannot be assimilated to it.

## The Quebec exception

Quebec provides a unique exception. Because of its geographical position
and its steady exposure to the common law tradition that applies in the
rest of Canada, Quebec is particularly receptive to the development of
trusts within a civil law jurisdiction, and could offer a pathway to
creating civil law data trusts.

The influence of the common law makes Quebec a hybrid civil law
jurisdiction. Its law of trusts is precisely one of the symbols of this
hybridity. Since the Civil Code of Québec (1994)[^1], the Quebec trust has
benefited from an updated framework under[sections 1260 et
seq](https://ccq.lexum.com/w/ccq/en#!fragment/sec1260/BQCwhgziBcwMYgK4DsDWszIQewE4BUBTADwBdoJC4BGAJgDYAGASgBpltTCIBFRQ3AE9oAchGtKYXAj4DhYiYSkIAynlIAhYQCUAogBldANQCCAOQDCu1qTAAjaKWxxmzIA)that allows for the creation
of‘civilian’ trusts that are as flexible and comprehensive as
its common law counterpart. Since then, the Quebec trust has been
defined as a specific way of holding property or rights for the benefit
of a person or the fulfillment of a purpose authorized by the
law([section 1260
C.C.Q](https://d.docs.live.net/8fc1b14dad51ed7b/Documents/Civil%20Code%20of%20Qu%C3%A9bec,%20CQLR%20c%20Chttps:/ccq.lexum.com/w/ccq/en#!fragment/sec1260))[^2]within
a regime of fiduciary obligations. Even if the UK trust and the Quebec
trust are conceptually very different because of the legal traditions in
which these institutions are embedded, they share a common substance. As
a result, it is possible to consider Quebec trusts as a civil law
mechanism of data stewardship in a manner quite familiar to the UK-style
data trust.

[^1]: C.C.Q in the following.

[^2]: Centre Paul-André Crépeau for Private and Comparative Law,*Private Law Dictionaries*, *sub verbo*“[trust1](https://nimbus.mcgill.ca/pld-ddp/dictionary/show/46135?source=NEWPROPEN)”.

Although some may criticize the Quebec trust for being a heterodox
institution from a civil law perspective, it has the potential to
transpose the issues surrounding UK data trusts into civil law.
Moreover, the Quebec trust is indirectly part of the European landscape
as its principles have been applied in European countries, notably the
Czech Republic.[^3]

[^3]: Alexandra Popovici, "Trust in Quebec and Czech Law: Autonomous Patrimonies", (2016) 6 *European Review of Private Law* 929–950.

## How are Quebec data trusts similar with UK data trusts?

Like the UK trust, the Quebec trust is a legal mechanism within data
rights can be pooled and administrated by a trustee.Quebec data trusts
could be set up by one or more groups or organisations who wish to
mutualize their rights over the data. This has been the main focus of
current projects aiming to implement legal structures for pooling and
sharing urban, cultural or health data. In principle, a similar approach
could be taken by individuals wishing to pool their rights, but, at this
time, this option seems less developed in practice for several reasons
including the absence of a right to data portability in Quebec civil
law.

Quebec trusts also offer similar institutional flexibility to UK trusts
in relation to how they may be created. For example, Quebec trusts can
be established by contract or will. No specific formality is required
although a written document is recommended. They can also be established
by law or by judgment according to section 1263 C.C.Q.

Above all, as its UK counterpart, Quebec data trusts have a great
potential to restore public confidence since it offers a legal basis for
an accountable and independent data steward. The Quebec trustee is
subject to a series of obligations (prudence, diligence, honesty,
loyalty) and must account for his administration ([section 1287
C.C.Q.](https://ccq.lexum.com/w/ccq/en#!fragment/sec1287)). In
the event of a breach of his fiduciary obligations, the trustee becomes
personally liable ([section 1308
C.C.Q.](https://ccq.lexum.com/w/ccq/en#!fragment/sec1308)). They
can also be removed from office ([section 1290
C.C.Q.](https://ccq.lexum.com/w/ccq/en#!fragment/sec1290)).

## How Quebec data trusts differ from UK data trusts?

However, Quebec data trusts also have some specific features that
distinguishes them from UK data trusts.

First, Quebec trusts are mostly constituted for a purpose (charitable
and non-charitable). In contrast, UK trusts are essentially constituted
for beneficiaries (or a charitable purpose). In other words,*purpose
trusts*are the principle in Quebec civil law whereas they are the
exception in UK law. The Quebec law of trusts does not admit
non-charitable purpose trusts unless they are established in a
particular statute. This pattern is very interesting, as all data
trusts’ goal – whether they are civil law or common law mechanisms – is
to mitigate power asymmetries in the data market. Data trusts are
fundamentally intended to serve specific purposes (e.g., to protect the
rights and interests of individuals). From this point of view, Quebec
data trusts may have a more widespread and easier pathway to deployment
than UK ones.

Second, the Quebec trust is not based on ownership, but administration.
According to the Québec Civil Code, the trustee is not the owner of the
rights put in trust. The trustee has a different status which is
called*administrator of property of another*[^4],and which gives “the
exclusive control and administration” of the rights placed in trust.
This means that the trustee can exercise all the rights relating to the
trust assets and can take any appropriate measure to ensure their
allocation according to the purpose defined in the trust document
([section 1278 C.C.Q.](https://ccq.lexum.com/w/ccq/en#!fragment/sec1278)). This
mode of holding rights is quite unusual, even in civil law. But this is
also interesting in the context of data where the main challenge lies in
the supervision of data use and where concepts of ownership over
personal data can be debated. A Quebec data trust could set up a rights
management scheme without making personal data objects of ownership, but
while ensuring some degree of control for individuals over their data
through the trustee’s administration.[^5]

[^4]: [Sections 1299 et seq C.C.Q.](https://ccq.lexum.com/w/ccq/en#!fragment/sec1299)

[^5]: Sjef van Erp, “Management as Ownership of Data” (24-06-2019), in: Sebastian Lohsse, Reiner Schulze and Dirk Staudenmayer (eds.), Data as Counter-Performance: Contract Law 2.0? (Hart/Nomos, Forthcoming), Available at SSRN:<https://ssrn.com/abstract=3541779> at 77-93.

## Key challenges for further developments in Quebec

In the wake of the UK data trusts buzz, the idea of a Quebec data trust
has been receiving widespread attention. NoQuebec data trust has yet
been created, butseveral private and public organisations are currently
exploring how the Quebec law of trust could be adapted to the specific
context of data.

In addition to the operational challenges that will need to be addressed
in creating a data trust, some legal uncertainties still need to be
clarified for the transition from theory to practice and to ensure a
tangible future for the Quebec data trust.

For example, the current regime for supervision and liability of
trustees under Quebec civil law has some weaknesses. It is not clear how
trustees are held accountable when a Quebec trust has no beneficiary
(which is likely to be common, since Quebec trusts are essentially
purpose trusts). To counter this deficiency, the Civil Code of Quebec
allows any interested person to act against the trustee and denounce the
shortcomings of their administration ([section 1290
C.C.Q.](https://ccq.lexum.com/w/ccq/en#!fragment/sec1290)). This
provision should open the way for class actions, but this has yet to be
more explored in practice. The law makes provision for the creation of a
surveillance body to monitor Quebec purpose trusts ([section 1287
C.C.Q.](https://ccq.lexum.com/w/ccq/en#!fragment/sec1287)) but
this provision has not been implemented yet.

The legal framework for personal data is currently being revised both in
Quebec and in Canada. Data trusts are at the heart of these discussions,
but Quebec organisations will have to wait and see to what extent these
reforms will welcome or not the implementation of data trusts. It seems
likely that many of these questions will be answered in the coming
months, perhaps by means of Quebec data trusts prototypes.

  


This text is taken from the first version, published in French, on the
website of the Cyberjustice Laboratory (Anne-Sophie Hulin, “Introduction
à la fiducie Québécoise de données” (26-11-2020), online: *Laboratoire
de Cyberjustice Laboratory*
<https://www.cyberjustice.ca/2020/11/26/introduction-a-la-fiducie-quebecoise-de-donnees/>).
In addition, I am very grateful to Harleen Kaloty for her great help in
adapting this text.

