---
layout: post
title: "Understanding the Data Governance Act: in conversation with Sylvie Delacroix, Ben McFarlane and Paul Nemitz"
author:
- given: Sylvie
  family: Delacroix
  institute: University of Birmingham
  person_page: sylvie-delacroix
- given: Ben
  family: McFarlane
  person_page: ben-mcfarlane
  institute: Oxford University
- given: Paul
  family: Nemitz
  institute: European Commission
  person_page: paul-nemitz
- given: Jessica
  family: Montgomery
  institute: University of Cambridge
featured_image: /assets/images/photo-1559589688-6ba6beafe1e5.jpg
excerpt: Publication of the draft Data Governance Act marks the next phase of the European Commission’s plans to bolster data sharing across the EU. In a bid to shed some light on the intricate questions surrounding this Act’s reference to the delegatability of data rights, Sylvie Delacroix (University of Birmingham) hosted a conversation with Ben McFarlane (University of Oxford) and Paul Nemitz (European Commission).
date: 2021-01-26
---

Publication of the [draft Data Governance
Act](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52020PC0767) marks
the next phase of the European Commission’s plans to bolster data
sharing across the EU. The Act sets out a regulatory framework for data
intermediaries – providers of data sharing services – including
platforms for data sharing and organisations that support individuals to
assert their data rights. Publication of the Act has raised a variety of
questions about the development of data trusts. In a bid to shed some
light on the intricate questions surrounding this Act’s reference to the
delegatability of data rights, [Sylvie
Delacroix](https://www.birmingham.ac.uk/staff/profiles/law/delacroix-sylvie.aspx) (University
of Birmingham) hosted a conversation with
[Ben McFarlane](https://www.law.ox.ac.uk/people/ben-mcfarlane) (University
of Oxford) and [Paul
Nemitz](https://www.coleurope.eu/whoswho/person/paul.nemitz) (European
Commission) –

## The provision in the Data Governance Act that states rights under the GDPR “can only be exercised by each individual and cannot be conferred or delegated to a data cooperative” (recital 24) has attracted a lot of speculation. What is the Data Governance Act trying to achieve in this respect?

***Paul***: The intention behind the Act is to create a framework for
institutions that can act as trustworthy data intermediaries. These
would support different parties to access data and help people to share
their data for the public interest, while also supporting individuals to
exercise their data rights.

***Sylvie***: These data rights have been hard-won. So it isn’t
surprising there are concerns that, if they aren’t properly governed,
data intermediaries could lead to a watering-down of those rights by
circumventing processes around consent. But this really depends on how
those rights are managed by the intermediary and how those
intermediaries can be held to account.

***Paul***: Rights can be managed in different ways – typically, when we
talk about delegating a right, we expect there to be a mechanism where
that delegation can be revoked. This is different to the conferral of
rights, which is permanent. Given the aim of the Act is to help people
exercise their rights, it seems unlikely the Act is genuinely seeking to
rule out delegation to data intermediaries of rights regulated by the
act under the heading “Rights of Data Subjects” in Chapter III of GDPR,
such as the right to ask for deletion of data. This would prevent a
range of relationships we know are helpful in helping people exercise
their rights – like when individuals task an agent with acting on their
behalf and which already exist, such as services which help people to
find data about them and seek their deletion. Delegation is also
different to transfer of rights, which usually implies something more
permanent. But when it comes delegation, and even more conferral, of
consent or the ability to make a contract on data processing, the
situation is of course different and much more delicate. I would think
the formulation in the recital in the first place is to be read
as  these “rights” of individual data subjects relating to their data. 

## Given what the Act says, would data trusts be able to act as a data intermediary?

***Ben***: What is usually distinctive about trusts is that the trustee
holds rights on behalf of a beneficiary and has a duty to exercise those
rights in the ways set out in the terms of the trust. This differs from
using an agent to manage your rights – when working with agents, you
keep the rights, and the agent exercises them on your behalf. At first
look, it might seem like the Data Governance Act is incompatible with
trust-style governance, but there are different ways of setting up
trusts. 

***Sylvie***: The way that rights are held in trust doesn’t seem to
quite fit in either of the two extremes – the permanence often
associated with the idea of ‘transfer’, or the delegation that implies
no transfer.

***Ben***: Yes – in some trusts, rights are transferred, but the
transfer is not irrevocable, and there are lots of examples of trusts
where there is the option to take back the rights held in trust.
Conversely, there are also examples of rights that cannot be
transferred, but where a trust has still been established to help govern
their use. This tends to arise in cases involving contractual rights
that are expressly or impliedly non-assignable. In those cases, courts
have held it is possible to have a trust. In the context of data trusts,
there would potentially provide a workaround if there are concerns about
the transferability of data rights: the holder of the data right (the
data subject) could declare that she holds the right on trust for the
data trustee. The data trustee would then get the benefit of this data
right, which she would be bound to use in a particular way, according to
the terms of the trust. In such a scenario, no transfer of a right has
occurred.

***Sylvie***: So it is possible to disentangle questions about whether
you can transfer or delegate a data right and whether you can establish
a data trust. Would these be sufficient to ease concerns people might
have about maintaining their rights? 

***Paul***: The key thing for data trusts is that this process of
managing rights does not become so complicated as to make trusts
inaccessible to the people they should serve. It needs to be easy to
make choices about data use and move between data sharing services. 

***Ben***: There are some rights that both cannot be transferred and
cannot be held on trust, but this is quite rare. In English trust law,
there is an interesting conceptual question about what characteristics
must rights have if they are to be capable of being held on trust.

## Looking at the bigger picture, what does the Data Governance Act tell us about the data governance landscape and the role that data trusts could play in it?

***Paul***: The Data Governance Act is fundamentally trying to increase
data access while also increasing our ability to exercise our data
rights. There are different ways of achieving this aim, which need to be
worked through in legislative discussions. 

***Ben***: Trusts is an area of law where researchers and practitioners
have long had to grapple with the idea that parties can hold different
types of rights and that those parties can be subject to duties to use
those rights in certain ways. This means trust lawyers have had to think
about how rights can be aggregated, how their use can be monitored, and
what action should be taken if someone fails in their duties. 

***Sylvie***: In that context, data trusts are a way of trying to
promote enfranchisement – helping individuals have a voice in decisions
about data use – while protecting against vulnerabilities stemming from
data use. The key question that the Data Governance Act raises is: what
types of safeguards need to be in place to give confidence that those
managing my data rights are doing so in my interests, and that those
intermediaries that fail in these duties would be held to account? 

***Ben***: An advantage of trusts is that the courts can intervene to
control a trust and can, for example, replace the trustees, if they are
failing in their duties. 

***Paul***: The Data Governance Act is also pointing to other forms of
safeguards that regulators can put in place. In it, the Commission is
proposing mechanisms like certification as a way of making sure data
intermediaries meet certain standards. To understand what this means,
and what further efforts are needed, we need to get further into the use
cases that can show us how these safeguards might work in practice. The
emphasis on cooperatives in the proposal is important for the mixed
nature of the data economy. It is not desirable to have a data ecosystem
only built around or even dominated by stock exchange notated or
capitalistically organised players. Giving cooperatives, foundations,
public interest organisations, such as NGOs, should be part of our
concern on the future data ecosystem. In light of the ever-growing
digital giants on the US Stock Exchange, we have to strengthen elements
of a mixed economy, also for spreading risks between different
organisational forms, so as to have a healthy mix of organisational
forms in our societies and economies. 

***Sylvie***: Trust law is but one legal framework among others when it
comes to developing innovative data stewardship mechanisms. I think it
is of particular interest (and could inspire other frameworks) because
of the robust institutional safeguards that come ‘built-in’. These
safeguards go beyond those available in the other data governance
mechanisms that are available today. At the Data Trusts Initiative, we
hope to be looking at these issues, and make such safeguards work in
practice over the coming year.
