---
layout: post
title: Data trusts and the draft Data Governance Act
author: 
- given: Jessica
  family: Montgomery
  institute: University of Cambridge
  person_page: jessica-montgomery
featured_image: /assets/images/data-governance.jpg
excerpt: The draft Data Governance Act marks the start of a new phase of action by the European Commission in its ambition to “boost a data-driven economy in Europe”. The Act sets out a framework to govern the work of data intermediaries – organisations that are involved in data sharing services – with the aim of increasing data sharing while supporting individuals to exercise their data rights. In this post, we look at some of the questions the Act raises about the development of data trusts.
date: 2021-01-29
redirect_from:
  - /blogs/data-trusts-and-the-draft-data-governance-act
  - /blogs/data-trusts-and-the-draft-data-governance-act/
---

The draft [Data Governance
Act](https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/proposal-regulation-european-data-governance-data-governance-act) marks
the start of a new phase of action by the European Commission in its
ambition to “[boost a data-driven economy in
Europe](https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2019-2024/vestager/announcements/speech-executive-vice-president-margrethe-vestager-data-governance-act-and-action-plan-intellectual_en)”.
The Act sets out a framework to govern the work of data intermediaries –
organisations that are involved in data sharing services – with the aim
of increasing data sharing while supporting individuals to exercise
their data rights. A range of [different data sharing
structures](https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/selectingdatastructures) can
help achieve these functions, and data trusts are one form of potential
data intermediary. In this post, we look at some of the questions the
draft Data Governance Act raises about the development of data trusts. 

#### Data trusts and data intermediaries 

Under the Commission’s definition, data intermediaries are “providers of
data sharing services” that “contribute to the efficient pooling of data
as well as to the facilitation of bilateral data sharing”. In technical
terms, the Regulation focuses on “providers of data sharing services
that have as a main objective the establishment of a business, a legal
and potentially also technical relation between data holders.” Within
this scope, the Act notes there is a specific category of data
intermediaries that seek to empower individuals to assert their data
rights under the GDPR. 

Data trusts provide institutional mechanisms to support such
empowerment. These bottom-up organisations allow individuals to pool
their data rights into an organisation – a trust – in which a trustee is
tasked with making decisions about data use on their behalf. 

To operate effectively, a data trustee would need to be able to make
decisions about how to exercise data rights – such as those set out in
the GDPR – on behalf of the trust’s beneficiaries. While the Act does
not specifically consider data trusts in this respect, it does comment
on data cooperatives, stating that rights under the GDPR “can only be
exercised by each individual and cannot be conferred or delegated to a
data cooperative”. 

This suggests that data trusts may need to be established in ways that
do not entail any rights transfer. As a possible workaround (suggested
by Prof. McFarlane [in our previous
blog](https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/understanding-the-data-governance-act-in-conversation-with-sylvie-delacroix-ben-mcfarlane-and-paul-nemitz)),
one could consider a scenario whereby “the holder of the data right (the
data subject) could declare that she holds the right on trust for the
data trustee. The data trustee would then get the benefit of this data
right, which she would be bound to use in a particular way, according to
the terms of the trust”. Independently of these concerns about rights
transferability, it is crucial to ensure it is simple for individuals to
move between trusts: this points to some important design considerations
that need to be factored into the creation of trust documents.

#### Institutional safeguards for trustworthy data intermediaries

In seeking to ensure the trustworthiness of data intermediaries, the Act
focuses on systems that can ensure their neutrality and accountability. 

To demonstrate the neutrality of data intermediaries, the Act proposes a
range of different safeguards. These include:

- restrictions on the use of data by an intermediary, with an
  intermediary being barred from exchanging data for its own interest
  (for example, to develop its own product or service); 

- clear separation of functions in those intermediaries that offer data
  sharing services in addition to other, potentially data-enabled,
  services; and 

- a requirement to notify Member States’ competent public authority of
  their intention to provide intermediary services, with that public
  authority being tasked with monitoring compliance with the Regulation.

The Act further creates a right to lodge a complaint against a data
intermediary, tasking national competent authorities with the
responsibility of managing such complaints and informing complainants
about the right to seek administrative or judicial remedy. These
provisions lay the foundation for mechanisms that allow competent
authorities or courts to sanction data intermediaries that are found to
be failing in their duties.    

Imposing fiduciary responsibilities on data intermediaries “in the case
of providers of data sharing services offering services for natural
persons” requires that a data intermediary be held to a duty of
undivided loyalty to the interests of the individuals – the data holders
– it purports to serve. Quite how this will be translated in practice is
a key question. 

In trust law, fiduciary responsibilities are well-established and
delineated through centuries of case law. A fiduciary responsibility
requires trustees to act with prudence, impartiality and undivided
loyalty on behalf of their beneficiaries. In the context of data trusts,
these responsibilities act as an institutional safeguard, helping ensure
the trustee acts independently of outside interests. 

Outside trust law, understandings of what is meant by the term
‘fiduciary responsibility’ vary. Clarifying both the nature of the
responsibilities required from different data intermediaries as well as
the nature of the institutional safeguards meant to give ‘teeth’ to
those responsibilities will be necessary.

#### Widening access and participation

In setting conditions for providing data services, the Act acknowledges
that, without policy intervention, such services may be out of reach for
many in society. In response, it sets a requirement that an intermediary
“shall ensure that the procedure for access to its service is fair,
transparent and non-discriminatory for both data holders and data users,
including as regards price”. 

As we discussed in a [recent Working
Paper](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5e3b09f0b754a35dcb4111ce/t/5fdb21f9537b3a6ff2315429/1608196603713/Working+Paper+1+-+data+trusts+-+from+theory+to+practice.pdf),
further action is required to ensure that data trusts are accessible to
all and that all those in a trust are able to meaningfully contribute to
decision-making. Achieving the goal of fair, transparent and
non-discriminatory intermediary services requires careful design of all
points of interaction between a data trust and its users. These
interactions might include promotion of the services offered by the
trust, efforts to make the tools and skills to create and manage a trust
accessible to all, and systems of participatory governance that engage
all those in a trust in decision-making.  

#### Where next?

The draft Data Governance Act sets out to create “hands-on conditions to
encourage public bodies, companies and people to take action, use their
rights and share their data”. In so doing, it raises questions about the
role that different forms of data intermediary can play in empowering
individuals and communities to influence how data about them is used. It
also raises important questions about the design and implementation of
such intermediaries, including data trusts. 

Over the coming year, the draft Data Governance Act will be subject to
further comment and scrutiny in the European Parliament. In parallel,
we’ll be working through some of the questions it raises at the Data
Trusts Initiative, looking for ways in which we can establish data
trusts that provide independent stewardship of data rights for the
benefit of society as a whole - and not just its least vulnerable
members.

*To read more about the implications of the draft Data Governance Act
for the development of data trusts, take a look at our recent blog
‘[in conversation with Sylvie
Delacroix, Ben McFarlane and Paul Nemitz](https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/understanding-the-data-governance-act-in-conversation-with-sylvie-delacroix-ben-mcfarlane-and-paul-nemitz)’.*
