---
layout: post
title: Data trusts as new models for the data economy
author:
- family: Blankertz
  given: Aline 
  institute: Stiftung Neue Verantwortung
  person_page: aline-blankertz
featured_image: /assets/images/unsplash-image-TtJ0CLjLi6w.jpg
excerpt: Data trusts are a promising concept for enabling data use while maintaining data privacy. In this blog, Aline Blankertz, explores what regulation for data trusts should look like and how we can make new models possible.
date: 2021-10-06
redirect_from:
  - /blogs/data-trusts-as-new-models-for-the-data-economy-p4ajk
  - /blogs/data-trusts-as-new-models-for-the-data-economy-p4ajk/
---

## Making new models possible: What regulation for data trusts should look like

Data trusts are a promising concept for enabling data use while
maintaining data privacy. Data trusts can pursue many goals, such as
putting data protection into practice more effectively, increasing the
participation of consumers or other data subjects, and strengthening
data sharing along the value chain. They have the potential to become an
alternative model to the current data practices of large platforms,
which are accused of accumulating data power and using it primarily for
their own purposes. To fulfil these hopes, data trusts must be
trustworthy, allowing their users to understand and trust that data is
being used in their interest.

Data trusts can take on many different legal shapes and forms, depending
on the jurisdiction in which they operate and the rights that citizens
in that jurisdiction have over data about them. Considering them from a
[civil law perspective](https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/how-can-civil-law-jurisdictions-support-data-trusts-the-quebec-example),
for example, in Germany, it can make sense to consider a data trust’s
defining features without using a legal trust (in the form set out in UK
law). Under German law, because there are [no absolute rights to
data](https://www.abida.de/sites/default/files/ABIDA_Gutachten_Datenrechte.pdf),
these cannot be transferred comprehensively.

However, no absolute right to data is required to authorise a data
trust, for example, to make an access decision on behalf of the data
subject (such as consumers or companies). If, as consistent with recent
literature, all legal relationships whose objective is the internal
representation of the interests of one contracting party vis-à-vis
another are considered trusts (German “Treuhand”), data trusts can also
be included under this broader concept of trusts. On this basis, we can
think about data trusts as trustworthy data intermediaries -
organisations that manage data on behalf of others while adhering to a
legal framework (including competition, trade secrets, and privacy laws)
in a trustworthy manner.

## Why and how to regulate data trusts

Currently, the political approach is to subject all forms of data trusts
and other intermediaries to the same rules through a “one size fits all”
regulation. For example, the Data Governance Act (DGA) gives data trusts
little leeway to evolve in the marketplace. In [our recent
paper](https://www.stiftung-nv.de/en/publication/regulation-data-trusts)
we argue that, , regulation should systematically analyse risk factors.
These can be identified across sectors; in particular, centralised or
decentralised data storage and voluntary or mandatory use of data trusts
are among them. The business model is not one of the main risk factors.

It is important for data trusts to be trustworthy for them to be widely
adopted, which can justify additional regulation. However, to still
encourage the development of data trusts, such additional rules should
be designed depending on the use case. The risk of a data trust use case
should be considered as well as the need for incentives to act as a data
trust. It is important to assess if, with additional obligations on data
trusts to ensure trustworthiness, other obligations can be relaxed.

It is helpful to look at specific sectors in which data exchange is
likely to increase and change to develop concrete proposals for which
regulation could be appropriate to govern that data exchange through
data trusts. Below we consider the case of medical data trusts and
personal information management systems in this regard.

## ** **Use case 1: Proposal regulation for medical data trusts

Medical data holds enormous potential for research to develop new and
more personalised forms of diagnosis and treatment. At the same time,
the data is highly sensitive and includes current treatment data as well
as potential future risk factors. Risks associated with using such data
include self-censoring behaviour, discrimination, and treatment failure
if data is not interpreted carefully.

Data trusts could help ensure increased data sharing and trustworthy
data use in medical research. To do so, they would need a legal basis
for data processing by scientific and commercial organisations for
medical research with data provided by a data trust. This legal basis
would overcome the considerable challenges that come with informed
consent by patients that persist with broad consent, an approach that is
intended to allow consumers to make the purposes for which data subjects
provide consent less specific. Opt-out would always remain possible.

In addition to this legal basis, trustees and policymakers should
consider additional regulation to ensure that the risks of the approach
remain manageable. Specifically, IT security must be certified by a
state-supervised body. Furthermore, data access should be designed in
such a way that only the data necessary for the research is accessible,
and personal identification is reduced as much as possible, for example,
with pseudonymisation, aggregation and/or federated learning.
Organisations that operate in areas that are likely to discriminate,
such as insurance and advertising, should be excluded.

By developing additional safeguards on IT security, privacy, and
discrimination alongside more competencies to use medical data without
having to rely on consent, data trusts could enable medical research.
This approach could allow for a broad range of medical research while
still ensuring that the interests of patients and society, in general,
are taken into consideration.

## ** **Use case 2: Proposal regulation for PIMS (data trusts)

Personal information management systems (PIMS) are intended to help
consumers enforce their rights and interests more effectively. However,
consumers have been reluctant to use these services, and companies such
as large platforms have found it easy to circumvent these systems. At
the same time, there is a risk of abuse in direct dealings with
consumers (e.g., through misleading information and menu navigation).

To control these risks and support the development of PIMS, model terms
and conditions for PIMS could be made the basis for certification. This
certification should identify them as meeting specified standards of
trustworthiness and align PIMS with the interests of consumers. These
terms and conditions should include minimum standards for IT security
and provide explicit consent for monetisation of personal data such that
direct monetisation of personal data is only possible when consumers are
aware. Furthermore, transparency requirements should make the monetary
and non-monetary transfer of data visible, for example, by requiring a
continually updated list of data users. The terms and services should
also contain restrictions on the use of data by affiliated services,
such that it takes place under the same conditions as for external
services. This would prevent conglomerate firms to give their affiliates
preferential access to data.

With these standards being met, it also makes sense to allow PIMS to
represent consumers more comprehensively, for example, to grant or deny
consent on behalf of their users. While the degree of mandatability of
data rights under the GDPR is not clear, positive examples exist, for
example, in the form of [“authorized agents” under the California
Consumer Protection
Act](https://medium.com/cr-digital-lab/on-operating-a-do-not-sell-authorized-agent-under-ccpa-b15a0bade0e1)
(CCPA) which can represent consumers to request data about them to be
deleted and/or not to be sold to any other parties. Large companies such
as social media platforms could be obliged to cooperate with certified
PIMS in order to avoid that PIMS are circumvented systematically but
adopted more widely by both consumers and data users.

Far-reaching neutrality obligations, such as those spelled out in the
DGA, can make PIMS less likely to develop and succeed. PIMS such as
polypoly.eu, digi.me and bitsabout.me already struggle in the market,
but risk becoming even less viable if, for example, they are not allowed
to charge commissions for providing data access. Voluntary certification
can help consumers to identify trustworthy models without prohibiting
other models from entering the market. The terms that serve as a basis
for certification should address specific conflicts of interest to allow
PIMS to still pursue some remaining commercial interests.

## Recommendations for action across sectors

Regulating data trusts should not increase existing legal uncertainty
and complexity but reduce them. This is necessary to incentivise the
development of new models and approaches. Additional requirements to
establish trust and reduce risks also justify lowering hurdles. Overly
strict neutrality requirements inevitably mean that data trusts can be
provided only by the government, which creates other potential problems.
Instead, it is more productive to use legal restrictions to prevent
specific conflicts of interest.

Certification can aid transparency, if specified requirements are met.
Certification is a sensible approach particularly when the risk of
overly restrictive regulation is high, and information asymmetries, for
example, call for intervention. Another pragmatic way to promote data
trusts is to use pilot projects and government demand strategically.
However, this method is no substitute for developing new models,
especially business models.

Whether data trusts can fulfil the high hopes placed on them depends
largely on how the regulatory framework that applies to them is
designed. Overall, regulatory proposals for data trusts should aim to
make data use and data protection more compatible. To this end, it is
helpful to focus on specific risks that are not covered by the existing
legal framework; at the same time, it is also helpful to remove hurdles
that stand in the way of this goal.
