---
layout: post
title: Seeking Data Trusts Pioneers! Funding from the Data Trusts Initiative will support pilot projects to set up real-world data trusts
author:
- given: Paula
  family: Bibby
  person_page: paula-bibby
  institute: University oF Cambridge
featured_image: /assets/images/shutterstock_719939482.jpg
excerpt: The Data Trusts Initiative pilot project scheme, which launches today, is inviting applications from individuals or organisations that would like to set up a data trust. These pilot projects would facilitate independent stewardship of data through the action of data trustees, support individuals and groups to collectively negotiate terms of data use, and provide strong institutional safeguards against data mis-use. Pilot projects might come from any sector, and the scheme is open to applications from any country. 
date: 2021-07-29
---

***Could a data trust benefit your community? A new programme from the
Data Trusts Initiative will providing funding for pilot projects that
trial the bottom-up data trusts model in practice.*** 

New uses of data can improve our health, wealth and wellbeing, but
careful stewardship is needed to align these aspirations with concerns
about the vulnerabilities that data use can bring, for individuals,
communities and society. In pursuit of this goal, policymakers and
practitioners have been investigating the role that data trusts can play
in growing the digital economy while empowering citizens to influence
the terms of data use.

Data trusts offer a mechanism for trustworthy data stewardship. They
allow individuals or groups to pool their data rights into an
organisation – a trust – in which trustees take decisions about data use
on their behalf. Amidst growing interest in data trusts as a fresh
approach to data stewardship, further action is now needed to develop
real-world data trusts that serve community needs.

A new fund from the Data Trusts Initiative will help drive this action,
by supporting data trusts pioneers to set up pilot projects that trial
data trusts methods in practice.

Announcing the fund, Neil Lawrence, DeepMind Professor of Machine
Learning at Cambridge University, said: “In the last few years we’ve
made a lot of progress understanding the role that data trusts could
play in data stewardship. The field now needs real-world pilot projects
that will lead the way in translating data trusts principles into
practice.” Sylvie Delacroix, Professor of Law and Ethics at Birmingham
University, added: “Data trusts aim to empower us, data subjects to
‘take the reins’ of our personal data. To be effective, we need data
trusts that can represent citizen interests and concerns and we need
data trusts pioneers to help create these trusts.”

The Data Trusts Initiative pilot project scheme, which launches today,
is inviting applications from individuals or organisations that would
like to set up a data trust. These pilot projects would facilitate
independent stewardship of data through the action of data trustees,
support individuals and groups to collectively negotiate terms of data
use, and provide strong institutional safeguards against data mis-use.
Pilot projects might come from any sector, and the scheme is open to
applications from any country.

In addition to awarding funds to facilitate the set-up of a data trust,
the Data Trusts Initiative will support successful applicants through
expert advice, workshops and networks to help navigate operational
barriers that pilot projects might encounter.

To submit an Expression of Interest in the scheme, please visit: the
[application
form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdTP57wTpAXFkWKArUema21LbXkHQox2Xms52hQeCGQX1XMOg/viewform).
The deadline for completing the Expression of Interest form is 30
September. After that date, a shortlist of projects will be asked to
develop a full application for funding.

For further details about the application process, please visit our
pilot funding page. An information session for applicants will be held
on Wednesday 8 September 2021 at 15:00 – 16:00 BST. please [register
here](https://cl-cam-ac-uk.zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_hWObBWIvTt6wz7VRX4cmmA)
