---
layout: post
title: "Data Trusts for Health Research"
author:
- given: Jessica
  family: Bell 
  institute: University of Warwick
  person_page: jessica-bell
featured_image: /assets/images/unsplash-image-w-RTffXK9tM.jpg
excerpt: Dr Jessica Bell explores how data trusts might operate in the health research context, specifically in birth cohorts and longitudinal studies that aim to engage participants over their lifetime with data trusts as a model for increased participation. 
date: 2022-07-13
redirect_from:
  - /blogs/data-trusts-for-health-research
  - /blogs/data-trusts-for-health-research/
---

*Emperor’s new clothes or model for increased participation in birth
cohort studies? - Dr Jessica Bell, University of Warwick, explores using
data trusts for health research.*

Data trusts are an emerging and varied concept, and their operation will
differ according to context. Commonly though, data trusts are proposed
as a mechanism of data stewardship and a model of data governance with
the potential to empower individuals and communities by authorising
others (broadly referred to as ‘data intermediaries’) to act on their
behalf. 

The 2020s may be the next era for seminal advances in longitudinal
population studies and birth cohort studies, with new technology
creating opportunities for data collection and access at an
unprecedented scale. A data trust is one possible approach for data
governance to capitalise on this new era, but the concept raises as many
questions as answers at this early stage.

With funding from the Data Trusts Initiative, The Born in Scotland Data
Trust aims to explore how data trusts might operate in the health
research context, specifically in birth cohorts and longitudinal studies
that aim to engage participants over their lifetime. Birth cohort
studies and longitudinal population studies are a particularly
interesting example for exploration because they often involve multiple,
related participants; recruiting pregnant women and offering the
possibility for children born into the study to become research
participants themselves.

## Governance considerations


A complex ethical and legal landscape for health research applies to
longitudinal studies and birth cohort studies, and typically consent
will govern the collection and storage of data and tissue samples from
participants over decades. In this paradigm, the mother will consent on
behalf of the child to be involved in the research study. In view of the
long-term and potentially multi-generational commitment to involvement
in health research, some of the goals of data trusts such as empowerment
over uses of data and data rights, may offer promise for increasing
involvement and engagement of parents and children in birth cohort
studies and may help enable access to richer data for improved health
outcomes in the future.


In collaboration with CI [Professor Rebecca
Reynolds](https://www.ed.ac.uk/profile/rebecca-reynolds) at the
University of Edinburgh, we will develop a pilot data trust as a
governance model for the “[Born in Scotland in the
2020s](https://gtr.ukri.org/projects?ref=MR%2FV034294%2F1)” birth cohort
study (hereafter, ‘BIS’). BIS is a pilot study funded by the Medical
Research Council to test the feasibility of establishing a large-scale
‘virtual’ pregnancy and birth cohort. Most BIS data will be ‘standard’
administrative, health care records and biological sample data, but the
vision is to capture much broader data about participants allowing
investigations into the impact of novel environmental exposures on
pregnancy. The project will also follow the development of children born
into the BIS study. The ambition is that the future cohort will include
100,000 participants and be representative of pregnant women living in
Scotland.

## Designing a data trust for birth cohort studies

We aim to co-design the data trust with BIS participants, who will be
invited to draft the terms of the governing trust instrument to increase
understanding of data rights and involvement in decision-making about
data. As we are developing the trust model at the pilot stage of the BIS
project, this offers a unique chance to try to develop a truly
[‘bottom-up’ approach](https://doi.org/10.1093/idpl/ipz014). We aim to
recruit data ‘trustees’ from a range of backgrounds pertinent to BIS
including research participants and research midwives (who are often
involved in the process of recruiting participants).

## Representation

Crucially, for this to be possible even in theory, significant public
and participant involvement is necessary to build an understanding of
data trusts amongst potential participants. Through our engagement
activities, we seek to understand the perspectives of women involved in
BIS around their participation in health research governance and the
desirability of trust models, to start a dialogue and test feasibility
for adoption in future research studies.

Working with CI [Ann Hagell](https://ayph.org.uk/staff/) at the
[Association for Young People’s Health](https://ayph.org.uk/), we will
also explore whether data trusts can help support young people to be
more involved in the next generation of birth cohort studies. There is a
need for modernised and creative approaches to children’s involvement in
birth cohort studies, to increase engagement with young people who are
typically underrepresented in public and participant involvement
activities and research governance design and whose involvement can
significantly enrich research and future health. We will explore the
ways in which a data trust can be used to govern children’s data and
data rights. Through a series of youth engagement exercises, we hope to
hear from young people about their views on involvement and uses of data
for health research.


A core component of the project will be examining the alignment (or
non-alignment) across health research frameworks and data trust models.
In an earlier phase of this project, PI [Dr Jessica
Bell](https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/law/people/jessica_bell/),
University of Warwick, and [Professor Melissa
Wake](https://www.mcri.edu.au/users/professor-melissa-wake) (‘GenV’,
Murdoch Children’s Research Institute) hosted a bi-national,
multi-stakeholder workshop, bringing together 30 participants from
multi-disciplinary backgrounds including academics from legal, ethical,
governance, medical and information technology backgrounds,
representatives of youth advisory groups, stakeholders from different
longitudinal cohort studies, and health research regulatory authorities.


Possible benefits identified included increased participation in data
governance and engagement with participant concerns over time. Members
of a youth advisory group expressed enthusiasm for increased
participation and empowerment in birth cohort studies; as well as
trustees representing their interests independently from family members
and the research team and keeping them informed about the research and
data rights. Other advantages included accountable decision-making about
data use in the best interests of participants; potentially protecting
against conflicts of interests, particularly where research involves
commercial partnerships.

Concerns were however expressed around the complexity of the existing
landscape, and questions were raised about the added value of data
trusts in this context. Communicating the complexity of a data trust to
different participants will be challenging and meaningful development of
bottom-up data trusts will require clear and constructive co-design. Our
workshop emphasised that to meaningfully evaluate the promise of data
trusts for increasing participation in health research and the added
value to existing models, there is a pressing need for pilot studies and
worked up examples to cut through the hype and test the feasibility of
data trusts in different contexts in the real world. To ensure we don’t
simply reinvent the wheel, there are also valuable lessons to be learned
from the experiences of large-scale research projects like UK Biobank
Ltd, whose day to data decision-makers are themselves [‘trustees’ in
law](https://doi.org/10.1093/medlaw/fwz022).

With the UK government explicitly referring to data intermediaries in
their response to the [‘Data: a new
direction’](https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/data-a-new-direction)
consultation, it is clear that data intermediaries are set to be part of
the UK data landscape. Through the BIS Data Trust, we look forward to
exploring how data trusts, as an example of data intermediaries, might
operate within the health research framework to better understand the
challenges and opportunities for data trusts for health research in the
future.
