---
layout: post
title: Creating a pathway to successful real-world data trusts
author:
- given: Jessica
  family: Montgomery
  institute: University of Cambridge
  person_page: jessica-montgomery
featured_image: /assets/images/unsplash-image-Q1p7bh3SHj8.jpg
excerpt: Taking the data trust pillars that were the basis of our research agenda – community dialogue, technical systems, legal mechanisms, business models, and use cases – as a starting point, they point to an emerging framework for operationalising data trusts. With the aim of helping create a pathway to real-world implementation, we’ve started mapping these insights into the operational framework.
date: 2022-03-14
redirect_from:
  - /blogs/creating-a-pathway-to-successful-real-world-data-trusts
  - /blogs/creating-a-pathway-to-successful-real-world-data-trusts/ 
---


Just over a year ago, the Data Trusts Initiative started with the
question “how do we create real-world data trusts?” Building on the
excitement that was growing around data trusts as a novel form of data
stewardship, we wanted to understand the data stewardship strategies
that could empower individuals and communities and to support the data
trusts community in operationalising real-world data trust projects.

## More research needed?

In our [first Working
Paper](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5e3b09f0b754a35dcb4111ce/t/5fdb21f9537b3a6ff2315429/1608196603713/Working+Paper+1+-+data+trusts+-+from+theory+to+practice.pdf),
we identified areas where further action was needed to clarify core data
trust concepts and to understand what suite of practical actions could
help deliver trustworthy data stewardship. This [data trusts research
agenda](https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/moving-from-theory-to-practice-how-do-we-create-real-world-data-trusts)
asked: how do data trusts fit in the wider data governance landscape?
What institutional safeguards are needed surrounding data trusts? Which
interventions will ensure data trusts are inclusive and representative? 
Which business models can help ensure the continued sustainability of a
data trust? And which use cases can help clarify how data trusts would
work in practice?

Picking up this agenda, our [Data Trusts Initiative-funded research
projects](https://datatrusts.uk/research) have been investigating a
variety of issues at the interface of theory and practice, including:

- What do recent use cases tell us about operational strategies for data
  trusts?

- How can legal mechanisms associated with data trusts enhance
  participation in healthcare research?

- How might data trusts operate in the urban context?

- How can data trusts support civic engagement and environmental
  stewardship in local communities?

- How can data trusts be created in civil law jurisdictions?

- Does the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) allow individuals
  to mandate their data rights to a trust (or other data intermediary)?

- What combination of technical and legal infrastructure can give
  individuals more control over data about them?

## Moving from research to practice

Insights from these studies are deepening our understandings of the
issues and challenges in moving from theory to practice. Taking the data
trust pillars that were the basis of our research agenda – community
dialogue, technical systems, legal mechanisms, business models, and use
cases – as a starting point, they point to an emerging framework for
operationalising data trusts. With the aim of helping create a pathway
to real-world implementation, we’ve started mapping these insights into
the operational framework set out below.

![An emerging framework for operationalising data trusts. Data Trusts
Initiative, March
2022](/assets/images/emerging-framework-for-operationlising-data-trusts.jpg)

With research, policy, and practice in this domain moving at pace,
those developing data trusts are often operating across multiple levels
– and across multiple pillars – simultaneously. At an ecosystem level,
data trusts practitioners are grappling with foundational questions
about the nature of the demand for data trusts, what functions these
trusts should deliver, and how the operational environment shapes their
form and function. When considering what approach a data trust should
take in this environment, different operational strategies might be
possible, and a data trust will need to negotiate how to map those
strategies onto trust-level objectives. At a practical level, those
operational strategies translate to a range of different design choices,
which will affect how a data trust works and how its beneficiaries
interact with the trust.

## The intersection of practice and policy

These projects are also increasing our understanding of the enablers
that contribute to an amenable environment for data trust pilot
projects. We’ve talked previously about the [policy
enablers](https://datatrusts.uk/blogs/governments-role-in-developing-data-trusts-insights-from-recent-research-and-practice)
that can support the development of data trusts on this blog before.
Adding to these, our research projects highlight the importance of
interventions that:

- nurture demand for alternative forms of data stewardship; and

- ensure data trusts remain trustworthy through appropriate safeguards
  or accountability structures.

If data trusts are to be truly bottom-up, they need to be accessible to
all in society. This means not only building a public dialogue about
data and its use and increasing data literacy efforts, but also making
the purpose, language and operational of data trusts open and inclusive.
Understanding what data trusts are and what benefits they bring needs to
be easier, and there need to be ways of bringing communities together to
agree how data trusts should serve their interests.

This clarity can provide a foundation for a wider set of interventions
that ensure data trusts remain trustworthy. Those interventions might
include common definitions about what a data trust – in comparison to
other types of data stewardship – does; standards or certification
mechanisms to ensure underpinning technologies are fit for purpose; 
strategies that ensure sufficient longevity of data trusts; or testbeds
that allow practitioners to explore ways of innovating and failing
safely.

## Supporting data trusts pioneers

Many of the issues surrounding data trusts today can only be resolved in
application. Examples, case studies, and pilot projects are needed to
work through different strategies, building on this operational
framework and creating a pathway to real-world data trusts.

The Data Trusts Initiative is delighted to announce our first set of
funded pilot projects. Over the next year we’ll be working with the
Brixham Data Trust and the Born in Scotland Data Trust to set up
community-focused data stewardship activities. You can read more about
their work [on our website](https://datatrusts.uk/pilot-projects), and
we’ll be posting further insights or updates to our operational
framework as these projects progress.

  

