---
title: "Placemaking with data: a data trust to serve a coastal community"
author:
- given: Natasha
  family: Nicholson
  person_page: natasha-nicholson
  institute: charlick+nicholson architects
- family: Charlick
  given: Pamela
  institute: charlick+nicholson architects
date: 2022-10-27
excerpt: The Brixham Data trust shares insights on creating a new form of civic institution, for community benefit, that arises from exploring data in a coastal community in South Devon, UK.
featured_image: assets/images/unsplash-image-ksDj8tu4QQw.jpg
---

Imagine yourself in a coastal community in South Devon, UK, a fishing
town with a population of around 17,000. It is a strong, resilient and
independent-minded community with an active voluntary sector, located in
an outstanding natural environment. It is also a community concerned
about the lack of affordable homes for local people, the cost of living
crisis, and a low-wage economy. And it is a place on the front line of
climate change, with rising sea levels and increasingly fiercer storms
predicted to affect the local area. This is Brixham, where we are
working in the community on a pilot project to build a place-based
community data trust.

Effective data use could help develop policy responses to these
concerns. **Data in coastal communities**, in particular, has been under
the policy spotlight: a concluding statement in the ‘[Health in Coastal
Communities
Report’](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1005217/cmo-annual_report-2021-health-in-coastal-communities-summary-and-recommendations-accessible.pdf)
[](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1005217/cmo-annual_%20%20report-2021-health-in-coastal-communities-summary-and-recommendations-accessible.pdf)
(2021) by Chris Whitty (UK CMO) says, *“The paucity of granular data and
actionable research into the health needs of coastal communities is
striking.”*[^whitty] Our research in Brixham confirms this pattern: there is a
lack of specific and detailed data available about the place. Data is
often siloed in disparate organisations and is often hard to access.
Underpinning these difficulties is the model of data sharing whereby
citizens’ personal data, or ‘data about me’, is routinely transacted
with commercial organisations via standard consents in an asymmetrical
power relationship, which many people feel is past its sell-by-date. We
think a data trust can help disrupt this pattern, and more effectively
leverage local data to respond to local concerns.

[^whitty]: Chief Medical Officer’s Annual Report 2021 Health in Coastal
Communities – Summary and recommendations. Chris Whitty.
<https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1005217/cmo-annual_report-2021-health-in-coastal-communities-summary-and-recommendations-accessible.pdf>

In this blog, we share some findings and insights from our journey to
build the foundations for a data trust in Brixham, and some thoughts
about a new form of civic institution, for community benefit, that may
arise from exploring data in a physical place.

As architects, responding to the DTI’s call for ideas to take data
trusts from theory to practice, we proposed a place-based data trust.
The idea of a data trust provided a structure for managing data rights
connected to local data through collective action, in the context of a
transparent, trusted and secure governance structure with oversight. We
also felt a place-based approach could leverage the proximity between
citizens, data sources, community and action for change to produce rich
insights, and an intensity of interest and participation. The
place-based data trust is an opportunity to bring the people who know
the place and the community best to the centre of decision-making about
local data, data rights and the purposes that local data should be put
to. It can show how insights from personal data, with the necessary
protections in place, can be harnessed for collective benefit.

The idea of enhancing data collection and use in the context of cities
has already been the subject of much attention, but the all-seeing eye
and all-knowing algorithmic mind of ‘smart city’ and ‘big data’
constructions are not appropriate for our project. The Brixham data
trust focuses on an area of just a 3km radius from the town centre,
including 14km^2 of the marine environment. In this context, we’re
looking at specific issues where data could serve community interests,
supported by a lean, nimble, and responsive organisation that we believe
will result in a more economical and sustainable data trust model. Four
themes have been guiding our conversations and ideas with the community:
placemaking and public spaces, environmental stewardship of the land and
marine environment, health and wellbeing, measures to address the
climate emergency, energy efficiency and net-zero ambitions.

The pilot project is designed as a journey to a data trust, allowing the
time to nurture a data ecosystem or a data culture, and the space to be
responsive to needs expressed by local people. We are guiding the
project to grow organically from ‘what already exists’ in Brixham,
starting with sharing data literacy resources. We are cultivating
familiarity with data by seeking out people in the community who are
working with data and sharing their stories and insights. We are
building foundations incrementally, listening as ideas, concerns,
networks and campaigns emerge from the place and asking the question,
‘**What can data *do* for us?**’. Prospect Brixham CIC was set up to
support this process.

A ‘touchpoint’ is our term to describe a meaningful connection between
people, data and place – this is where the abstract concept of data
comes to life. Data can have colour, interest, meaning and value when
its potential to illuminate a local issue, tell a story, or lead to a
change, is revealed. This specificity is at the heart of this project.
Naturally, these ‘touchpoints’ will change over time because they have a
social and cultural context, sometimes borne of economic necessity, or
environmental crisis. The data trust allows for the slow careful
archiving of data for heritage and environmental stewardship or for
extracting fast insights for an urgent issue. Both these paths of data
discovery and data activism are both important. For the discoverer,
recording, documenting and finding out new, quality data about a place
and its people can reveal things that cut through long-held emotional
responses and refresh thinking about the future. The activist focuses on
data for change, as an evidence base. Both are about creating value in
the place and for the community.

The final form of the data trust will be a response to these
‘touchpoints’ - made-to-measure for the needs of this place. To be
relevant and useful, the data trust must address real needs and offer
benefits - a clear value proposition that is sustainable over the longer
term. This sets a hard test for data – it needs to prove its worth as a
change-maker, and a valuable community asset. And the community has a
challenge too - to move from the data shallows to the deep end as
data-literate citizens.

**Conversations about data** are already happening in the community.
Scratch the surface and many people will share their concerns about, for
example, lack of control over personal data consents, issues of data
rights, use and abuse of personal data online and knowing what data
people hold about you. Sometimes people express a feeling of resignation
that the power balance is so skewed, there is no point fighting it. The
data trust will help to navigate these issues and build strong
governance for data in the community, but it must first build trust with
citizens.

Our proposal is to set up a Charitable Incorporated Organisation (CIO) –
it has trustees, the oversight of the Charity Commission, and
participatory governance through a citizens’ panel.

The work to create the data trust is progressing across various fronts:

* A data challenge competition, open to all, invites ideas and
offers mentoring and support to five winning projects.

* Talks, workshops and pop-ups

* Trialling small research projects using personal data with
specific use cases e.g. recording energy use in the home (with Mydex
CIC). Participant’s data is shared between Personal Data Store (PDS) and
the data trust pilot. Data anonymisation, aggregation for collective
insights and the user’s experience are part of the study.

* A new open data platform (with The Data Place) will provide
access to a curated selection of open-source data.

* Investigating data-sharing opportunities with local partners e.g.
the local authority and environmental groups.

* Stakeholder involvement in the development of plans for the data
trust.

We can see ‘data’ is coming out of the shadows. Some individuals and
organisations are already on their own data journey, and are curious to
take part in a collective project for the community. There is interest
in how data could create social and financial value for the community. A
local network of organisations involved in conservation of the marine
environment is collecting sensitive data and using citizen science
methods. A central car park site is a focus for debate about public
space in the town. Data and digital tech people in the community are
coming forward to join the project. Recent issues – the local housing
crisis, cost of energy crisis, sewage on beaches, water shortages,
climate change heatwaves – have highlighted how useful data can be in
revealing what is behind the story, leading to informed decision-making.

Local voluntary organisations and other intermediaries are doing
impactful work with limited resources. They know their sector of the
community well, and the issues that need tackling and they have rich
insights drawn from years of experience in the place. They have good
ideas about ‘What can data do for us?’, but limited capacity to develop
and implement them. This must be factored into the pilot stage, both
growing the data ecosystem and the ongoing sustainability of the data
trust. 

Place helps us to make sense of data. A place gives spatial mapping and
a framework for understanding relationships. The physical world is where
cause and effect play out, helping us to see our impact on the
environment and our community. Maybe we care more about things when they
are close to home?

Perhaps this **new digital institution** with its feet on the ground,
bridging the digital and the physical world, managing our data rights
and security and stewarding data about our place and community, is
uniquely positioned to connect the functions of existing civic
institutions. It sits alongside them, but it brings fresh thinking and a
new set of skills and enables them to function better in the digital
age. A new kid on the civic block? We look forward to finding out.

Learn more about the [Brixham Data Trusts](https://prospectbrixham.org)
development
