---
layout: post
title: Italy as a Testbed for an Urban Data Trust in Europe
author:
- given: Bilyana
  family: Petkova
  institute: University of Graz
  person_page: bilyana-petkova
- given: Laura
  family: Papasodaro
  person_page: laura-papasodaro
  institute: University of Graz
featured_image: /assets/images/unsplash-image-jGfh31FMBU4.jpg
excerpt: Today the holders of the vast majority of mobility data are private service providers such as ride-sharing companies. Urban Data Trusts position themselves as an intermediary between the city and its people offering access to mobility data and more efficient use of data privacy rights vs private companies who do not necessarily take into consideration the common good. 
date: 2022-07-02
---

One type of particularly valuable data for a city and its people is
mobility data. Such data can help the municipality develop urban
intelligence solutions that offer safer and more equitable cities,
decreasing costs and improving urban connectivity. Today the holders of
the vast majority of mobility data are private service providers such as
ride-sharing companies. Private companies can use citizens’ personal
data for profit only, while the individual is rendered next to powerless
in the exercise of their data privacy rights.

As a consequence, privacy, and the protection of personal data in
continental Europe remain mostly formal entitlements with no practical
purchase. If unmediated, city administrations’ craving for mobility data
owned by the private sector can also translate into outright power grabs
and privacy violations.

For example, in the United States, the Los Angeles Department of
Transportation (LADOT) has deployed a protocol for mobility data called
the “Mobility Data Specification” and has further created an [Open
Mobility Foundation](https://www.openmobilityfoundation.org/) with a
group of stakeholders to manage the specification standard and advocate
for its adoption beyond LA. [The LADOT system has been
challenged](https://epic.org/documents/sanchez-v-los-angeles-department-of-transportation/)
in court by both rideshare companies (initially led by Uber) and civil
rights advocacy groups (led by the American Civil Liberties Union) on
privacy grounds. The LA dispute reveals a clear need for data governance
input in this process, and mobility data trusts as one example of an
urban data trust could provide a solution.

Known [power asymmetries](https://academic.oup.com/idpl/article/9/4/236/5579842)
between data controllers and data subjects show that individual data
rights can be [exercised best
collectively](https://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/ulj/vol47/iss4/1/). Urban
Data Trusts position themselves as an intermediary between the city and
its people offering access to mobility data and more efficient use of
data privacy rights vs private companies who do not necessarily take
into consideration the common good.

Here we explore the legal modalities of setting up data trusts in big
urban centres with a focus on the Italian context.

  
## Setting up a Data Trust in Italy

1. Two Legal Pathways

In Italy, a trust is a fairly used legal tool. There are two ways of
establishing it: under foreign law (*trust interno*), and under an
Italian doctrinal construction [not yet passed as
law](https://www.senato.it/leg/18/BGT/Schede/Ddliter/52177.htm) but
already in use (*contratto di affidamento fiduciario*).

  a. Italian Trusts under Foreign Law

  Unlike other civil law countries that encounter difficulties in
  adopting the common law instrument of the trust in their
  jurisdictions, Italy allows for the possibility of setting up trusts
  governed by foreign law.  After becoming a signatory of The Hague
  Convention of July 1st of 1985 on the Law applicable to Trusts and
  on their recognition, Italy recognizes foreign trusts. Although said
  convention did not explicitly mandate the recognition of foreign
  trusts in countries that do not have that category (see Article 13
  of the Convention), Italy went further in transposing international
  law. It allowed for the internal recognition of trusts whose
  significant elements are based in Italy but whose applicable law is
  not Italian. Thus, English law has been frequently used to create
  trusts in Italy. This legal specificity could possibly be used for
  establishing also a data trust. The well-spread use of trusts
  established under foreign law in Italy along with accumulated case
  law on the matter could help ensure legal certainty.

  b. Trust-like legal instruments in Italy (*Contratto di affidamento
fiduciario*)

  Scholars have gone further in theorizing the common law of the trust
  for Italian purposes: under a *contratto di affidamento fiduciario*
  in a trusteeship agreement, “settlor” and “trustee” can agree on a
  programme which the “trustee” undertakes to implement by using one
  or more assets for the benefit of one or more “beneficiaries” for a
  period not exceeding 90 years. Uses of this type of a legal
  arrangement so far resemble the traditional uses of Anglo-American
  trusts in
  [family matters](https://www.fondazioneforensebolognese.it/files/eventi_file/materiali_su_il_contratto_di_affidamento_fiduciario.pdf).
  The advantage of using this legal route for setting up a data trust
  is that it could meet with more trust amongst the general public and
  perhaps better integrate into the rest of the Italian civil law
  system.

## Holding (personal data) rights on trust in Italy

Italian doctrine supports the idea that a trust could have as its object
(also) movable, fungible or non-fungible assets, receivables, financial
instruments, stocks, assets and rights of all kinds. While the
possibility of holding personal data rights on trust is not specifically
foreseen by Italian law, importantly, a case of foreign trust has been
examined by the Court of Milan,[^1] where intellectual property rights
were held on trust and so was the right to privacy of the author.

[^1]: The trust was governed by US Law; the court in Milan recognized it
without further discussing the implications of holding such rights on
trust (Tribunale Milano Sez. spec. Impresa, 29/08/2018, (ud. 21/12/2017,
dep. 29/08/2018), n.8768).

 The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) that applies in Italy
complicates the conferral or mandatability of personal data rights to a
data trust. Conferral is not explicitly allowed nor excluded by the GDPR
whereas under Article 80 of the Regulation mandatability is foreseen
only for the so-called procedural or justiciable data rights (Art. 77-79
and 82 GDPR). Whereas the GDPR can be construed restrictively to
preclude mandatability of other rights except for the ones specified,
[it could also be argued
otherwise.](https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=4061726)

A wider interpretation of mandatability is supported by two instances
of the Italian law supplementing the implementation of the GDPR.

* The GDPR allows Member States to introduce specific provisions in
  relation to employment data (Article 88). The Italian data protection
  act expands data access for institutes of workers’ protection and
  social assistance “in relation to types of data specifically
  identified with consent by the interested party himself/herself”
  (Article 116).

* The same law enables data subjects to exercise their personal data
  rights posthumously, so long as they have made explicit their
  intentions while alive.

These examples imply both the discretion of national legislators to set
the boundaries of mandatability and the GDPR’s intent to enable
mandatability.

## Urban Data Trusts under Italian Constitutional Law

Finally, it needs to be said that the Italian Constitution presents [a
uniquely favourable framework for the development of urban data trusts
in Europe](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4018512).
In Italy, metropolitan cities are explicitly mentioned in the
Constitution. In conferring administrative powers to the Italian
municipalities, Article 118.4 of the Italian Constitution favours the
autonomous initiatives of citizens in the general interest of the city.
The provision, also known as ‘horizontal subsidiarity,’ indicates that
the entirety of decentralised organs of the state, including the
municipal tier, are required to cooperate in the devolution of powers
‘all the way down’.

Making use of Article 118.4 of the Italian Constitution, numerous cities
have opened the possibility to citizens to present projects and conclude
pacts with the administration. Bologna spearheaded the process with a
municipal ordinance about the collaboration between citizens and
administration for the care and regeneration of urban commons which was
later replicated and adapted in over 100 other Italian towns and cities.
Based on such pacts, the municipality usually offers to cover some of
the costs, provide experts and public space, and help with the promotion
of the initiatives. Based on the municipal ordinance, in Bologna a pact
for digital literacy has been signed between the administration and a
social and cultural centre. The pact aims to develop some digital
literacy activities to be offered to Bologna residents. The
administration has committed to providing its media channel for
promotion, offering training activities, and contributing financially.

In short, our survey of several European civil law jurisdictions
revealed that the overall legal backdrop in Italy favours the
establishment of a (mobility) urban data trust in an Italian city where
the local administration may facilitate bottom-up uptake.

