---
layout: post
title: Co-designing data trusts for climate action
date: 2022-10-06
author:
- given: Vinay 
  family: Narayan
  institute: Aapti Institute
- given: Joe
  family: Massey
  institute: ODI
excerpt: Bottom-up approaches to data stewardship are already being used to tackle the climate crisis. In this guest blog, the Aapti institute and ODI report on the feasibility of data trusts for climate action and identify potential contexts where they could work.
featured_image: /assets/images/unsplash-image-ycW4YxhrWHM.jpg
redirect_from:
  - /blogs/co-designing-data-trusts-for-climate-action
  - /blogs/co-designing-data-trusts-for-climate-action/
---

Environmental data is used in many different ways to [combat climate
change](https://www.washington.edu/news/2020/12/15/a-i-model-shows-promise-to-generate-faster-more-accurate-weather-forecasts/),
from [improving the energy
efficiency](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/ai/ai-for-earth-thermafy)
of our homes to [helping to
combat
deforestation](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/ai/ai-for-earth-imazon).
It has become central to both top-down and bottom-up environmental
movements, and in the face of a global climate crisis, these movements
have never been as urgent as they are now. 

However, as with data systems at large, individuals and communities tend
to have little say in how data is collected, used and shared for climate
action. Data trusts and other forms of ‘bottom-up’ data stewardship have
emerged to reverse this trend and empower people to take part in the
data economy, and to further contribute to tackling the climate crisis. 

[Aapti
Institute](https://www.aapti.in/) and [the Open Data
Institute](https://theodi.org/), in partnership with the [Global Partnership on Artificial
Intelligence](https://gpai.ai/) (GPAI), undertook a research
study [to co-design and evaluate
the feasibility of bottom-up data
trusts](https://gpai.ai/projects/data-governance/data-trusts-in-climate-interim-report.pdf)
in tackling the climate crisis and its impacts.

## Why is data stewardship important?

Significant advancements in the field of artificial intelligence have
[bolstered](https://gpai.ai/projects/responsible-ai/environment/climate-change-and-ai.pdf)
the fight against climate change by distilling raw data into actionable
information and accelerating scientific modelling.

In order to train, develop and deploy these AI models we need access to
data, and given the complexity of the challenge we face in the climate
crisis, we need many different types of data from multiple sources.
[Data
stewardship](https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/blog/disambiguating-data-stewardship/)
is an approach to data governance that aims to unlock the societal value
of data in a ‘rights preserving way’, and can be viewed in response to
the common scenarios of [‘data
hoarding’,](https://theodi.org/about-the-odi/our-vision-and-manifesto/our-theory-of-change/)
where data is locked away in silos by a few organisations, [and ‘data
fearing’](https://theodi.org/about-the-odi/our-vision-and-manifesto/our-theory-of-change/),
where data is not shared for fear of privacy and related harms arising
from data misuse.

The idea of ‘[bottom-up data
stewardship](https://theodi.org/article/what-are-bottom-up-data-institutions-and-how-do-they-empower-people/)’
is a tonic to the typical exclusion of individuals and communities from
data collection, use and sharing. Bottom-up data stewardship recognises
individuals and communities as more than mere providers of consent (or
recipients of information about how data about them is used), and seeks
to [empower them to
participate](https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/report/participatory-data-stewardship/)
in the process of data collection, use and sharing. It provides them
with a say in decisions over who has access to data about them, how that
data is shared, for what purposes and to whose benefit.

Bottom-up approaches to data stewardship are already being used to
tackle the climate crisis. They are often framed as ‘citizen science’,
whereby individuals contribute data towards a particular project through
observations or sensors, such as [iNaturalist](https://www.inaturalist.org/)
and [Sensor.Community](https://sensor.community/en/).  

## Why data trusts?

[Articulated](https://academic.oup.com/idpl/article/9/4/236/5579842)
as a collective action tool for communities that enables them to govern
how their data is shared with and used, data trusts have seen [various](https://theodi.org/article/what-is-a-data-trust)
[definitions](https://thedataeconomylab.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/DataTrustsPpr_SM.pdf),
each highlighting different criteria. The [Data Governance Working
Group](https://gpai.ai/projects/data-governance/) of GPAI
reconciles these differences by identifying [5
functions](https://ceimia.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/2021-07-09-GPAI-summary-understanding-data-trusts-updated.docx.pdf)
that are core to a data trust:

1.  mutually agreed terms and conditions of data use

2.  expert trustees who govern the trust’s assets;

3.  strong fiduciary responsibilities binding trustees to act in the
    interests of the trust’s members;

4.  use of trust assets in accordance with agreed terms and conditions;
    and

5.  safeguards and oversight mechanisms to prevent data misuse and to
    take remedial action.

Not all of these functions are unique to data trusts. For instance,
[data cooperatives and data
collaboratives](https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/ADA_Participatory-Data-Stewardship.pdf)
also allow for the negotiation of data in accordance with agreed terms
and provide safeguards to prevent data misuse. The key component of a
data trust that differentiates it from other forms of data stewardship
is the *placing of fiduciary duties on independent trustees*. Fiduciary
duties imply that the trustees have a higher than normal, legally bound,
a duty of care towards the beneficiaries of the trust, making data
trusts inherently more trustworthy than other forms of stewardship. This
is especially important given the potential for misuse of data, and the
threats to privacy and other rights that such misuse can entail.  

## Our feasibility study of data trusts in climate

As part of our study, we [co-designed three bottom-up data
trusts](https://gpai.ai/projects/data-governance/data-trusts-in-climate-interim-report.pdf)
that can impact domains contributing to and /or affected by climate
change: (a) a data trust for cyclists in London (page 14 of the report);
(b) a data trust for small shareholder farmers in India (page 26); and
(c) a data trust related to indigenous climate displacement in Peru
(page 37).

We evaluated the feasibility of these based on a set of 8 criteria: the
incentive to create a data trust, capacity to run and engage with a data
trust, the existence of necessary legal levers to create and run a data
trust, the technological feasibility of a data trust and financial
sustainability of the data trust. Based on our analysis, we determined
the London Cycle Data Trust to be the most feasible, while the
feasibility of the other two data trusts was less certain.

The feasibility of the London Cycle Data Trust was a result of a few key
factors: the clear demand for the improvement of cycling infrastructure
in London, a high demand for mobility data from local authorities for
more informed decision making, a high level of digital literacy amongst
potential users of the data trust, the availability of multiple legal
forms for the data trust to take and strong digital infrastructure in
London. 

However, many of these factors were missing with the other two data
trusts. Not only do farmers in India not possess the required level of
digital literacy to engage with a data trust, but the lack of adequate
digital infrastructure in India (including internet access) in most
parts of rural India is also a major limiting factor. This is compounded
by the continuing lack of data protection legislation that recognises
key rights over data and provides guardrails against the misuse of data.

In Peru, while there is a strong demand for accurate data regarding
climate displacement, the relatively low levels of digital literacy
amongst the communities that are at risk of displacement was a major
hindering factor.

## Key Takeaways

We’re optimistic about the potential for a London Cycle Data Trust and
other, [similar data
trusts](https://www.digital.je/news-events/digital-news/jersey-must-seize-its-opportunities-now/)
to emerge to enable communities to use data to advocate for, and inform
the design of, sustainable transport infrastructure. Existing
initiatives such as [Posmo.Coop](https://posmo.coop/)
and the [Bike Data
Project](https://www.bikedataproject.org/) show that there is
interest and motivation among communities and that there are defined
uses for data in this context, as well as momentum behind the idea.
While the feasibility of data trusts for small shareholder farming in
India or for indigenous climate migration in Peru is much less certain,
there are clearly opportunities to improve how data is collected, used
and shared in these areas and we hope this work serves to highlight
them.

While our work demonstrated the high potential for a data trust in a
specific context, it also highlighted the high barriers for success
facing data trusts in other areas. While the differentiating
characteristics of a data trust are theoretically attractive ones (the
placing of fiduciary duties on the trustees), in a practical setting
these characteristics have yet to be applied and tested.

Thankfully, data trusts are but one manifestation of responsible data
stewardship, proposed as a tonic to problematic ‘one size fits all’
approach to data governance. In some cases, other forms of bottom-up
data stewardship may be better suited to meeting the needs of their
beneficiaries. We can see some of these in action already, empowering
individuals to take more control over their data. [Driver’s Seat
Cooperative](https://driversseat.co/) is one such example. A
driver-owned data cooperative, Driver’s Seat allows drivers in the gig
economy to maximise their rideshare and delivery earnings through use of
their data. 

Furthermore, given that bottom-up institutions presuppose a degree of
digital literacy and capacity to engage on data rights, there is a need
to explore a range of different institutions. In such contexts (which
are more common in the Global South) there is merit in encouraging
stewards that are not set up by the members themselves but by an
organisation (typically an NGO or CSO) that nonetheless acts in the
interests of the communities, they work with. [Abalobi](https://abalobi.org/),
a South African non-profit that empowers local fishers through the use
of their data, is a great example of this. While not set up by the
fishers themselves, Abalobi collects and stores data on behalf of the
fishers and shares data with third parties only if the fishers consent
to it. They also help fishers visualise the data they collect and use it
to their benefit. Alternatively, existing institutions such as
cooperatives and unions can also be empowered to transition to becoming
stewards of the data relating to their members. Given the scale of their
membership base, their trust within the community and financial
sustainability, pivoting existing community organisations to data
stewards can be very promising. [PescaData](https://pescadata.org/),
an initiative of [COBI](https://cobi.org.mx/), is
another example of this.

Our work set out to test the feasibility of data trusts for climate
action and identify the potential contexts where they could work. Given
certain base conditions, data trusts serve as a wonderful tool for
participatory data governance that provides users with agency over their
data whilst making data available for public good, in a democratic,
rights-respecting manner.  The type of [support and
development](https://datatrusts.uk/pilot-brixham) by the [Data Trusts
Initiative](https://datatrusts.uk/) is crucial in bringing data
trusts to life, and is the first step in understanding which contexts
data trusts can affect change, and where other approaches to data
stewardship may have more success in combating the climate crisis.
