---
title: "Participation pathways: designing for effective engagement"
author:
- given: Tim 
  family: Davies 
  institute: Connected by Data
  post: Research Director
featured_image: assets/images/unsplash-image-w1s5H_3Zn48.jpg
excerpt: Participatory practice around data involves innovation in so far as it explores citizen voice in a relatively new domain, with novel configurations of technology and power to unpack, technology can offer a range of new participatory tools.  Tim Davies from Connected by Data explores designing for effective engagement.
---

**How can the individuals and communities affected by decisions about
data be more engaged in shaping and making those decisions?**

New institutions of data governance, such as data co-operatives and data
trusts provide an important framework for enabling data stewardship to
be better aligned with community or public interest (by contrast, for
example, to corporate structures oriented towards prioritising
shareholder interests). However, even with trusts or co-ops, for
interest alignment to *actually* take place, there is a need for ongoing
and in-depth participatory practice.

This can often present data stewards with a number of challenges:

1.  **What kind of engagement model to adopt?** For example, should
    members of a data trust vote directly on proposals? Or should key
    decisions be made by a board with member representatives?

2.  **How to maximise meaningful discussion on complicated issues?** For
    example, deciding whether or not certain datasets should be linked
    and shared might involve a range of technical, legal and practical
    considerations, and often appears to require significant background
    knowledge.

3.  **How to create open and inclusive participation?** Engaging in
    governance takes time and resources: if it happens on an opt-in
    basis, there is a risk that those who get involved in making
    decisions about data will be un-representative of the communities
    affected by those decisions.

4.  **How to maintain a connection with authentic community voices?**
    Staff responsible for participation are often concerned that people
    who get engaged become ‘co-opted’ over time, aligned with the
    interests of the organisation or its leaders, rather than
    effectively representing community interests and insights into the
    governance process. This is sometimes described as a problem of
    ‘professional participants’ and introduces questions about how to
    regularly renew engagement practice.

These challenges are not unique to data governance. In particular, they
have received a lot of attention in the context of child and youth
participation, where the concept of the ‘evolving capacity’ provides a
useful framework for thinking about progressive opportunities to get
involved and take on a share in decision making.

Critically, meeting these challenges involves thinking not about
isolated opportunities for stakeholders to be involved in data
governance, but about how to develop **participation pathways** that
build capacity, connect different levels of decision making, and support
more inclusive and diverse participation in decision making.

## Mapping the pathways

Let us imagine, for example, a climate data co-operative (to [borrow a
hypothetical example from the Ada Lovelace Institute’s
work](https://connectedbydata.org/events/2022-06-06-rightscon#power-to-the-people-participatory-data-stewardship-in-practice))
that pools energy use data from participants across the world, and
considers requests to share access for climate-focussed research and
development projects. What pathways could exist for different
stakeholders to engage in co-operative governance?

In mapping the opportunities to build better participation pathways it
can help to first look at the core decision making structures and work
outwards. If ultimate responsibility rests with a board, then are there
clear routes for different stakeholders to select, or be elected to, the
board? Are places reserved for those whose data is being governed? Has
thought been given to removing barriers to board participation, and to
proactive outreach to recruit members from diverse backgrounds?

Then consider, how are board or operational decisions informed? If there
are key operating principles, are they published and open for comment
and regular review? Do staff have mechanisms to consult with community
members when exploring key decisions? Are there certain decisions which
are put to the community to advise on, or that are delegated for the
community to make?

Then look for other engagement touchpoints. Are there existing feedback
mechanisms where stakeholder voices may be heard? Are there any regular
surveys or listening exercises? Do groups of stakeholders have
self-organised discussion spaces that it would be appropriate to engage
with? Are there stakeholders *outside* the co-operative who have views
on what it does?

Having reached the outer edges of engagement, we can turn our focus
around and look at two critical participation pathways. Firstly, is
there a clear path through which views and interests communicated
through ad-hoc, informal or light-touch participation opportunities are
fed into the decisions that get made through more formal parts of the
governance system? Second, are there pathways by which individuals can
progress from light-touch engagement, to deeper forms of participation
in governance - supported to develop their engagement and capacity along
the way?

In thinking about any pathway, particular attention should be given to
issues of accessibility and inclusion. Can the path be made
intentionally more welcoming, and easier to travel for those who are
commonly marginalised, or more directly affected, by data decision
making?

## Pathways in practice

To return to our hypothetical climate data co-operative example, we
could imagine a user from a low-income community who is invited to
participate in a short feedback survey. The survey reveals a particular
concern amongst lower-income co-operative members about how data might
be used, and so a small group of low-income members are invited to speak
to the staff team about this, and are given support (and paid for their
time) to do so. In gaining exposure to some of the decisions the
co-operative has to make, they become interested in being more involved,
but have low confidence in doing so. The co-operative organises an open
governance training workshop along with a number of other similar
organisations. With encouragement from an existing board champion, an
individual from this group joins a voluntary working group, and later
stands for election to the board. In time, they become a board champion
supporting others to get involved in governance.

We could also imagine another individual who, feeling strongly about
data-sharing with a firm that also has links to a fossil fuel company,
starts a forum discussion on the topic. A community manager from the
organisation spots the discussion, but highlights that the current
principles of the co-op don’t prohibit this, and suggests that there are
options to either campaign to change the principles, or to campaign for
the third-party to drop its fossil fuel partnerships. The community
manager provides signposting to resources around how to develop a
campaign, and encourages debate on the issues, inviting expert inputs to
the discussion. A summary of the discussion is featured in the
organisation members newsletter. The discussions result in two small
groups forming: one which proposes a change to the principles, and the
other which develops an independent campaign to write to the
third-party. While neither is immediately successful, the participants
have followed pathways of participation that have built their advocacy
skills and understanding of the issues. At least one of these paths has
taken them beyond the boundaries of the organisation they originally
engaged with.

## The organisational journey

Developing effective pathways of participation also often involves a
journey of development for organisations: even young institutions like
Data Trusts and Co-operatives.

Harry Shiers’ [Pathways to
Participation](https://organizingengagement.org/models/pathways-to-participation/)
(developed in the context of child and youth participation) builds on
the ladder of participation, to look at how organisations develop their
ability to share power and responsibility for decision making. Shiers’
pathway starts from listening, and moves through providing support for
stakeholders to express their views, to taking those views into account,
to involving stakeholders in decision-making processes, and ultimately
to sharing power with stakeholders. At each point on this pathway, there
may be openings (a willingness to listen or share decision-making for
example), opportunities (a procedure or process that allows engagement
to happen), and obligations (a requirement that locks-in engagement
practice). Critically, reaching the point of sharing power does not mean
that there is no longer a need to retain a focus on earlier stages such
as supporting stakeholders in expressing their views. To mix our
metaphors a little: it’s important not to pull up the ladder of
participation behind as the organisation’s participation practice
matures.

## Embedding participation

Recent years have seen a significant rise in the number of citizen’s
assemblies, deliberative dialogues and citizen’s juries looking at data
issues. These have generally been one-off activities, designed to garner
a representative citizens’ voice on particular data collection,
management or sharing. While they can be valuable exercises, they have
often been divorced from wider pathways of participation, creating
temporary mini-publics that are not part of ongoing interaction. There
are, however, promising signs of mini-publics being woven into ongoing
practice: for example, with [Camden’s Data
Charter](https://www.camden.gov.uk/data-charter#udjj) being used to
review data decision making by a residents panel.

At [Connected by Data](https://connectedbydata.org), we’ve been starting
to map out the ways in which different participation models and methods
can be effectively applied to discussions about data. Our upcoming case
database will show the way different projects have put together surveys,
boards, dialogues, accountability processes, and other participation
tools in order to help ensure the way data is governed can better
reflect public expectations and views. In doing this, we’re drawing on a
wealth of existing work that explores participatory practice in other
settings, such as the [Participatory Methods
resources](https://www.participatorymethods.org/) on participatory
international development research, [Organizing
Engagement](https://organizingengagement.org/) work on inclusive
participatory practice in school and community settings, and
[Participedia methods
section](https://participedia.net/search?selectedCategory=method)
exploring a wide range of democratic innovations.

Participatory practice around data involves innovation in so far as it
explores citizen voice in a relatively new domain, with novel
configurations of technology and power to unpack, and technology can
offer a range of new participatory tools. However, there are already
some established pathways to start out on.

Ultimately, developing effective pathways of participation, and ensuring
the voice of stakeholders can shape both big picture and day-to-day
decision making around data involves both embedding a culture of
participation, and developing the right toolbox of approaches to deploy.
