---
layout: post
title: Helping data trusts manage personal data
author:
- given: Alan
  family: Mitchell
  position: Co-Founder & Chairman
  institute: Mydex CIC
  person_page: alan-mitchell
featured_image: /assets/images/unsplash-image-dWYU3i-mqEo.jpg
excerpt: At first sight, Data trusts and Personal Data Stores (PDSs) may look incompatible. But they could prove complementary, with PDSs providing infrastructure for Trusts to work much more efficiently and effectively.
redirect_from:
  - /blogs/helping-data-trusts-manage-personal-data
  - /blogs/helping-data-trusts-manage-personal-data/
---


For the past 50 years data has been collected and hoarded in closely
guarded organisational walled castles. This system is almost perfectly
designed to stifle data’s most powerful potential: the fact that when
data gets used it doesn’t get ‘used up’. Instead, it can be used again
and again, for many different purposes. Data therefore needs to be
shared, so that new combinations of data can be created, and new uses
made possible.

Our emerging ‘MUMU’ data society - one that enables ‘Many Users to use
data for Many Uses’ - will require an array of different, specialist
institutions and infrastructure enablers. Data Trusts contribute legal
mechanisms to this infrastructure, which can help empower individuals to
‘take the reins’ of their personal data.

One particularly important - and sensitive - challenge is how Data
Trusts interact with individuals’ personal data. Under the concept of
‘bottom up’ data trusts, data trustees exercise individuals’ legal
rights on their behalf, including negotiating others’ access to, and use
of, this data for them. Individuals would be able to switch data from
one Trust to another. Achieving this vision in practice requires
navigating questions about data access, management of consent and
privacy, and how individuals might move between trusts.


At Mydex Community Interest Company, data is stored, in each
individuals’ own personal data store. This PDS remains fully under the
control of the individual: each PDS is individually encrypted with each
individual holding their own private key to their own data store.
Individuals can then use this data for multiple purposes of their own -
they are empowered with agency and autonomy - including being able to
share their data with those Data Trusts they wish to support at the same
as sharing data with those organisations who provide services to them.
This enables many uses and many users, not lock ins and limits.

 At first sight, data trusts and PDSs may look incompatible. But they
could prove complementary, with PDSs providing infrastructure for Trusts
to work much more efficiently and effectively.

The following diagrams illustrate the way person-centric data sharing
works.


![](/assets/images/data-sharing-via-personal-store-mydex.png)

Services holding different types of data about an individual deposit
verified copies of this data in the individual’s personal data store.
This data remains under the individual’s control in their PDS, and kept
up to date and accurate via a secure API link (two systems talking to
each other over the internet safely and securely).


![](/assets/images/data-sharing-via-personal-store-2-mydex.jpg)


When the citizen needs to provide some of these data points to a
different service provider they simply say ‘Yes’, and the data can flow
accordingly - enabling them to **bring their data with them** to new
service relationships.

Managing access to data in this way is of the core capabilities of any
PDS infrastructure provider. It includes managing sometimes complex
interoperability issues (e.g. software systems and formats that don’t
‘talk’ to each other) and keeping the data up-to-date and accurate (via
API links with data originators). 

With complex webs of data access, understanding what users have
consented to becomes a challenge. An underpinning personal data store
infrastructure provides individuals with their own consent management
dashboards, by which they can see and manage all consents and
permissions for data access and sharing to all service providers and
Data Trusts that they have data relationships with.

The ability to outsource these data storage, access and sharing
challenges to a specialist operator could significantly cut costs and
complexity for individual Data Trust operators. It would also avoid a
huge amount of duplicated effort across multiple different Data Trusts
which, without such infrastructure, would all have to build their own
infrastructure for themselves.

Over time, as more data is collected in individual’s personal data
stores, they will already hold an increasing proportion of the data that
Data Trusts need: data that is already there and waiting to be shared.
Different bundles of this data could be shared with different Data
Trusts, according to their different speciality focus areas.

This also points to another challenge that practitioners must consider
when building their data trust infrastructure: that of privacy
protection. A Data Trust focused on, say, health issues, might be
responsible for making decisions about the use of large amounts of
highly sensitive personally identifiable data. This brings with it
several important considerations. For example, individuals may be
reluctant to share data if it is personally identifiable, especially if
it could be accessed by third parties, even if it is only for research
purposes. PDS infrastructure and decentralized data storage providers
can solve this problem by enabling the sharing of data in a
pre-anonymised form. For instance, [**Mydex CIC**](https://mydex.org/)
has already built a platform called *Inclued* which enables exactly
this: the sharing of ‘profiles’ of people devoid of personal
identifiers.

*One of the first pilot projects funded by the Data Trusts Initiative,
the* [**Brixham Data Trust**](https://datatrusts.uk/pilot-brixham.html), *a
coastal community data trust - who aim to develop a dynamic local data
ecosystem to inform, engage, and test the use of real datasets within a
3km radius of the town centre - is trialling incorporating Personal Data
Stores into the infrastructure of the data trust to test this approach
and look forward to sharing the project findings later in the year.*

